--- Page 1 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance(2025), 1, e44, 1–21
doi:10.1017/cfl.2025.10028
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Architectures of AI: Tech power broking war?
Miah Hammond-Errey1,2
1Deakin University, Victoria, Australia and2Strat Futures Pty Limited, New South Wales, Australia
Email: miah@miahhe.com
(Received 20 January 2025; revised 22 June 2025; accepted 13 October 2025)
Abstract
This article investigates the profound impact of artificial intelligence (AI) and big data on political and
military deliberations concerning the decision to wage war. By conceptualising AI as part of a broader,
interconnected technology ecosystem – encompassing data, connectivity, energy, compute capacity and
workforce – the article introduces the notion of “architectures of AI” to describe the underlying infrastruc-
ture shaping contemporary security and sovereignty. It demonstrates how these architectures concentrate
power within a select number of technology companies, which increasingly function as national security
actors capable of influencing state decisions on the resort to force. The article identifies three critical factors
thatcollectivelyalterthecalculusofwar:(i)theconcentrationofpoweracrossthearchitecturesofAI,(ii)the
diffusion of national security decision making, and (iii) the role of AI in shaping public opinion. It argues
that, as technology companies amass unprecedented control over digital infrastructure and information
flows, most nation states – particularly smaller or less technologically advanced ones – experience dimin-
ished autonomy in decisions to use force. The article specifically examines how technology companies can
coerce, influence or incentivise the resort-to-force decision making of smaller states, thereby challenging
traditional notions of state sovereignty and international security.
Keywords: National security; intelligence; AI; security; war; resort-to-force
1. Introduction
Technology companies have emerged as powerful actors in the calculus of war and peace, as artifi-
cial intelligence (AI) systems are increasingly influencing state-level decision making on the resort to
force (Erskine & Miller,2024). The evolving literature on society-technology interactions has intro-
duced concepts such as technology ecosystems, platforms, and stacks, which can help us to better
understand the impact of AI on resort-to-force decision making. This article synthesises these con-
cepts under the umbrella of “architectures of AI,” focusing on the growing influence and power of
technology companies – now largely synonymous with AI firms – in military decision making and
state deliberations over the use of force. These firms form an “infrastructural core” (van Dijck, Poell
& de Waal,2018), which controls global information flows and services, thereby diminishing the
capacity of nation states to make independent decisions on matters of war and peace.
This is one of fourteen articles published as part of theCambridge Forum on AI: Law and GovernanceSpecial Issue,AI and
the Decision to Go to War, guest edited by Toni Erskine and Steven E. Miller. Thank you to the reviewers for their extensive
engagement and recommendations. Thank you to Toni, Steven and the team for your incredible support and convening this
wonderful group.
© The Author(s), 2026. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and
reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 2 ---
2 Miah Hammond-Errey
As Erskine (2024, p. 175) argues, the pervasive nature of AI suggests that “AI-driven systems will
… increasingly influence the … consequential step of determining if and when a state engages in
organised violence. In short, AI will infiltrate the decision to wage war”. To date, power has been
accumulated across each of the “architectures of AI.” This article considers possibilities for how
companies may wield that power in society and in relation to resort-to-force decision making. This
article shows how technology companies are not merely providers but have become de facto national
security actors, capable of impacting state sovereignty through direct coercion, indirect influence,
or the strategic offering of incentives. Specifically, it sets out how US technology companies have an
increasing capacity to coerce, influence or incentivise the decisions of smaller nation states, including
in resort-to-force decision making.
This article contends that the accumulation and exercise of power within the architectures of AI
are fundamentally altering the political calculus and practical realities of going to war. Specifically,
it examines three interrelated dimensions: (i) the concentration of power in technology and digi-
tal infrastructure, (ii) the diffusion of national security decision making, and (iii) the role of AI in
shaping public opinion. Taken together, these factors degrade the autonomy of nation states, particu-
larly smaller or technologically reliant ones, in making sovereign resort-to-force decisions. While the
analysis is grounded in an Australian perspective, its implications are relevant to liberal democracies
globally.
2. The “architectures of AI”: looking across the stack
This section outlines the often colloquially used term “tech (technology) stack” as well as the infras-
tructure underlying and essential for AI systems. I refer to these collectively as the “architectures of
AI.” Considering these components as architectures across the technology stack enables examination
of actors (including companies and individuals) who are involved in AI. It also allows exploration of
how changes to underlying infrastructures, architectures and applications of AI shape resort-to-force
and national security decisions.
Academics and pioneers in the field define AI in different ways (Collins, Dennehy, Conboy &
Mikalef,2021).DifferentdefinitionshavealsobeengiventoguidetheresearchanddevelopmentofAI
policy and regulations. Moreover, AI definitions evolve over time. Early definitions tended to include
comparisons to human intelligence, whereas more recent definitions tend to focus more specifically
on AI’s autonomy and goal-directed behaviour, as well as the acknowledgement of specific capa-
bilities, including perception, reasoning, learning and problem-solving (Whelan, Hammond-Errey
& Villeneuve-Dubuc, 2024). This article invokes the Australian Department of Industry, Science
and Resources (DISR) definition of AI as “an engineered system that generates predictive outputs
such as content, forecasts, recommendations, or decisions for a given set of human-defined objec-
tives or parameters without explicit programming” (DISR,2024). The DISR definition of AI is also
based on the respective International Organization for Standardization (ISO) definition (ISO/IEC
22,989:2022).1 ThetechnicaldefinitionsofAIareimportantbecausetheyareclearerandmoreprecise
than general and popular references to a variety of technologies.
We can also think about AI, machine learning, and algorithms in the context of a “tech stack.” The
term “technology stack” or “tech stack” (also sometimes an “AI stack”) is often used to describe the
layers or levels of technologies, tools and software that companies use to build and maintain their
digital products and services (Tsaih, Chang, Hsu & Yen,2023). It is referred to as a stack to help
visualise the technologies being stacked on top of each other, from frontend to backend, to build an
1The ISO develops and publishes international standards. These definitions were built on in subsequent ISO standards pub-
lished in 2023, which include guidance on AI management systems (ISO/IEC 42,001:2023) and AI risk management (ISO/IEC
23,894:2023). This definition also includes the interrelated definitions of “machine learning” and “algorithm.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 3 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 3
application. A stack can have many possible layers depending on the service or product. The AI tech-
stack model is a conceptual framework2 – it does not map onto specific systems (Tsaih et al.,2023) –
but it does provide a lens through which to look at different layers of AI.
This article employs the term “technology companies” to refer to the entities driving contempo-
rary AI development. In the current paradigm, AI and Big Tech are synonymous (Kak et al.,2023).
Almost exclusively, AI development is dependent on these firms. This includes the compute capac-
ity, data holdings and market reach to scale and sell AI products. (Kak et al.,2023). The distinction
between “AI companies” and technology companies has thus largely dissolved, as the latter domi-
nate the development and commercialisation of AI. Even ostensibly independent organisations, such
as OpenAI, operate in close partnership with these firms (for example, with Microsoft). For these
reasons, this article uses the broader term “technology companies” rather than “AI companies.”
Thisarticleconsiderstheunderlyinginfrastructure–orarchitecture–essentialforAI:data,energy
generation and access, compute capacity, connectivity and workforce. I refer to these collectively as
the “architectures of AI.” The design of technology shows us where the power lies (Donovan,2019),
and the lens of architecture highlights how technology companies are entangled with politics and
how they influence resort-to-force decision making. Understanding the architectures of AI allows
us to observe accumulated power, consider the broader impact that technology companies have on
policy and decision making, and identify how technology companies and government are enmeshed.
Indeed, Rogers and Bienvenue (2021) argue that the layers of the technology stack act as gateways
to accommodate influential gatekeepers who exert power over the flow of information across the
stack.
3. Resort-to-force decision making and the architectures of AI
This article sets out how the architectures of AI have the capacity to influence nation-state delibera-
tionsontheresorttoforce.Thus,itisnecessarytoconsiderhowsuchdeliberationsoccur.Thissection
provides a brief overview of the literature on technology, geopolitics, and resort-to-force decision-
making. The empirical analysis regarding how such deliberations are made remains a complex and,
in many respects, under-documented area of research. There is a substantial body of scholarship on
the doctrinal and normative frameworks governing the use of force, such as legal and theoretical
analyses in international law journals.3 However, empirical studies that systematically examine the
actual decision-making processes are comparatively scarce.
In international relations and law, much of the existing analysis focuses on the interplay between
legal standards, risk assessment and other considerations, rather than on the empirical realities of
how decisions to resort to force are made in practice. “States must make a variety of calculations
when confronted with a decision about whether to use force against or inside another state. In use
of force decisions, the divide between policy and legal doctrine is often disputed” (Deeks, Lubell &
Murray,2019, p. 3). International law is itself indifferent towards domestic political or constitutional
prerequisites to using force (Hendell,2023).4 The literature on resort-to-force deliberations, whether
aboutinputsoractualdecision-makingprocesses,issurprisinglyslimoutsidetheUS.Existingworks,
largely focus on historical case studies, primarily in the US, nevertheless provide helpful insights. For
example, Whitlark (2021), writing in the context of nuclear force, concludes that executive perspec-
tive and individual personality – not institutional structure – are paramount to such resort-to-force
deliberations.
2The concept of a tech stack has also been applied in the design of political geography to make the fundamental claim that
the stack is planetary-scale computation making system, replacing other forms of governance and sovereignty – with great
political consequence (Bratton,2015).
3See for example (Waxman,2013; Bode,2023).
4Perhaps this is because international law treats states as equal and therefore does not concern itself with their internal
political machinations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 4 ---
4 Miah Hammond-Errey
Increasing attention has been afforded to how private corporations play a powerful role in geopo-
litical decision making. For instance, Sommer, Matania and Hassid (2023) write, “the digital frontier
of nations changed, and with it the concept of national security.” They argue that there can no longer
be an exclusive focus on territory and people. The concept of national security (like sovereignty and
jurisdiction) is now heavily intertwined with tech companies and AI success.5 To escalate an issue to
a matter of national security is inherently a political choice. National security is also a matter of pru-
dential value: a condition which must be maintained against others’ potential to degrade it (Gyngell
& Wesley,2007).
Neilsen and Pontbriand (2025) consider how cyberattacks against privately owned and operated
civilian critical infrastructure challenge the notion (so fundamental to liberal democracies) that war
is premised on a strict delineation between military and civil domains. Their focus is on how NATO
members understand their role in protecting civilian critical infrastructure. This article provides an
excellent foundation for understanding the relationship between private and public in individual
infrastructure and cybersecurity. However, it is less helpful for understanding power asymmetries
and the impact of companies or individuals attempting to leverage the nation state and governing
functions.
Less has been said about how AI powerbroking cultivates a climate in which private corporations
have the capacity to influence, coerce or incentivise resort-to-force decision making by nation states.
Kelton et al. (2022) suggest that US digital platforms, as exclusive service providers, seem to acquire
some of the extractive and transformative power traditionally ascribed to the sovereign state and,
moreover, sit beyond the sovereign state’s capacity to regulate and control. Rogers and Bienvenue
(2021, p. 96) argue that the layers of the technology stack act as gateways accommodating influential
gatekeepers who exert power across it. In previous work, I have showed that the big data landscape,
which includes AI, “will continue to alter national security by changing who has information and
power to change and influence aspects of society” (Hammond-Errey,2024, p. 182).
Schaake (2024b np) writes, “the involvement of Big Tech companies in active military conflicts
raises tough questions about the concept that underpins the foundations of international relations
and international law: state sovereignty.” Schaake (2024b) notes that companies including Google,
Microsoft and SpaceX have few, if any, legal mandates according to international law as they are
private actors. “Companies are playing an ever more critical role in this strange cyber dividing line
between war and peace” (Schaake,2024b). This role is often considered in the context of geopolitics
and state legislation and international affairs, as set out below:
Yet companies… exude sovereign power in new ways. They have monopolies on key insights
and data analytics and make decisions about affairs that were once the exclusive domain of
states, while these companies are not subject to comparable checks and balances. Moreover,
companies that operate at a global scale often chafe against geographic borders. Even when
governments want to exert control over such companies … they face a variety of constraints
(Schaake, 2024b).
This article moves beyond observing that technology companies are involved in geopolitics and
insteadhighlightshowthisintersectswithAIandresort-to-forcedecisionmaking.Thereisagrowing
body of literature that looks at the use of technologies and AI in intelligence, which of course influ-
ences resort-to-force decision making. Intelligence – “knowledge vital for national survival” (Kent,
1966, p. vii) – forms an important input into resort-to-force deliberations. The impact of big data and
5One example is the 21 February 2025 Executive Order the White House released, titled Recent Defending American
Companies and Innovators From Overseas Extortion and Unfair Fines and Penalties The White House. It has largely been seen
as threatening retaliatory tariffs against countries trying to hold US technology companies accountable and ensure they pay
their fair share of corporate taxes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 5 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 5
AI on national security and intelligence production plays a significant role in framing and deliber-
ating on national security matters (Hammond-Errey,2024). Hershkovitz (2022) and Zegart (2022)
outlinethetransformativenatureofAItothepracticeofintelligenceanditsinputintoresort-to-force
decision making.
Krasner (1999) makes the argument that the key attributes of sovereignty are never perfectly
present. “There has never been some ideal time during which all, or even most, political entities
conformed with all of the characteristics that have been associated with sovereignty – territory,
control, recognition, and autonomy” (Krasner,1999, p. 235). Alternative principles, such as human
rights,fiscalresponsibilityandinternationalsecurityhavebeenusedtochallengeautonomy.Krasnow
(Krasner, 1999, p. 236) notes how “in the absence of any well-established hierarchical structure of
authority, coercion and imposition are always options that the strong can deploy against the weak.”
Indeed, the term “technology sovereignty” has emerged as a consequence of the power of tech-
nology companies. Edler, Blind, Kroll and Schubert (2023, p. 1) argue that “technology sovereignty
should be conceived as a state-level agency within the international system, i.e., as sovereigntyof
governmentalaction,ratherthan(territorial)sovereignty over something.”Inthecontextofthearchi-
tectures of AI, the impact of the sovereigntyof governmental action includes deliberation processes
on the resort to force. This includes deliberation on the role of (and access to) largely civilian digi-
tal infrastructure in conflict, especially if owned and/or operated by a foreign state. It also includes
deliberationonensuringaccesstocivilianandmilitarytechnologyaswellasunderlyingtechnological
infrastructuresuchasconnectivity,energygenerationandaccess,computecapacity,andcomponents
such as advanced semiconductors.
This article argues that technology companies are national security actors and could use AI to
influence resort-to-force decision making. Contemporary power is exercised in and through the
architectures of AI. Companies that have monopolised the big data landscape of data abundance,
digital connectivity and ubiquitous technology (Hammond-Errey,2024) have centralised economic
power and attained near-sovereign state-like status (Schaake,2024a, 2024b; Khanal et al., 2024).
Coupled with the inextricable reliance that governments have on these companies and technolo-
gies, the unprecedented scope and concentration of power in technology companies means that
most nation states have, or will have, less autonomy in resort-to-force decisions. This could occur
directly through coercion, indirectly as influence, or through incentivisation at any point, such as
during the development of capabilities, pressure during conflict, through revocation of services, or
even supporting potential adversaries. These will be explored throughout this article.
4. Architectures of AI: implications of concentration of power, diffused decision making and
public opinion
This section considers the concentration of power across architectures of AI, data, energy generation
andaccess,computecapacity,connectivityandworkforce.Itthenexploresareasofinfluenceinresort-
to-force deliberations across three important areas of focus: the concentration of power, the diffusion
of national security decision making, and the role of AI and the information environment in shaping
public support. The section reveals that because of the scope and concentration of power in tech-
nology companies, most nation states have, or will have, less autonomy in resort-to-force decisions,
either directly through coercion, indirectly as influence or through incentives.
Digital infrastructure is the backbone of our societies. The technology ecosystem is dominated by
a small number of companies across all levels of the architectures of AI. This concentrates informa-
tion flows, critical data sets, computing power, and technical capabilities (Andrejevic,2013; Cohen,
2017; Edward,2020; Moore,2016; van Dijck et al.,2018) that are essential for functioning democra-
cies (Richmond,2019; Watts,2020). The dominance of these companies has handed them scale and
influence akin to nation states (Lehdonvirta,2022, p. 3), challenging the primacy of governments
(Eichensehr,2019). This, in turn, is transforming the relationships that companies have with nation
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 6 ---
6 Miah Hammond-Errey
states,challengingconceptionsofnationalsecurityandultimately(knowinglyorunknowingly)influ-
encing state decisions on the resort to force. This section first outlines the accumulation of power
across the architectures of AI. It then considers diffused decision making. It subsequently explores
the implications of this power concentration on resort-to-force decision making, either directly
through coercion, indirectly as influence or through incentivisation. Finally, it outlines how AI has
the capacity to shape public opinion, impacting, if not diminishing, state capacity to engage with its
citizens.
4.1. Data
Data is the foundation of AI. The technology ecosystem has been dominated by a small number of
companies, concentrating information flows, critical data sets and technical capabilities for analysis
(Andrejevic, 2013; Cohen, 2017; Edward, 2020; Moore,2016; van Dijck et al.,2018). The “epicen-
ter of the information ecosystem that dominates North American and European online space is
owned and operated by five high-tech companies, Alphabet-Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon,
and Microsoft” (van Dijck et al.,2018, p. 6). These companies have monopolised aspects of the big
data landscape of data abundance, digital connectivity and ubiquitous technology (Hammond-Errey,
2024).
The constellation of technologies that constitute AI (Bell,2018) require massive amounts of data.
The companies that dominate the consumer-driven big data economy and own most of the data
in the West include Alphabet (Google), Facebook, Amazon (Moore & Tambini,2021; Neef, 2014;
Sadowski,2020; Zuboff,2019), Microsoft (Moore & Tambini,2021; Neef,2014; Zuboff,2019), Apple,
Alibaba (Verdegem,2022), Twitter/X (Neef,2014), Uber (Neef,2014; Sadowski,2020), TikTok and
Tencent (Verdegem,2022). The vast majority of digital data is sold and resold for profit (Kitchin,
2014; Sadowski,2020; Zuboff,2019). Data and the ability to analyse it give substantial market power
only to the largest online platforms Santesteban and Longpre (2020).
4.2. Compute capacity
Ownership of data storage and computational capacity is highly concentrated. It is estimated that
Amazon, Microsoft, and Google together hold 70 percent of the global cloud infrastructure mar-
ket, which includes the market for graphics processing unit (GPU) compute used in AI research
(Lehdonvirta, 2023). “There are only a few companies that own exponential computing power, can
attract AI talent, and have access to data to develop and train advanced machine/deep learning
models” (Verdegem, 2021). Moreover, the computational capacity that these platforms rely on is
geographically concentrated (Ghahramani,2023). The US and China have the most public GPU clus-
ters in the world. China leads in the number of GPU-enabled regions overall; however, the most
advanced GPUs are highly concentrated in the US. The US has eight “regions” where H100 GPUs –
the kind that are the subject of US government sanctions on China – are available to hire (Perrigo,
2024). In 2021, the US held a dominant pole position with 33 percent of global data centres, and the
broader Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) housed 77 percent of
data centres (Daigle,2021).
A similar story can be told with high-performance computers. As of June 2024, the first three and
five of the top 10 most powerful non-distributed computer systems in the world are based in the
US (Top500 2024,2024). Additionally, across the top 500, the US accounts for 34.2 percent of the
system total and 53.7 percent of the performance total (Top500 2024,2024). Australia reportedly had
0.88 percent of the world’s computing capacity as of November 2022, and the United Kingdom 1.3
percent – while the top five countries (the United States, Japan, China, Finland and Italy) had 79.1
percent(Top500,2022).Lehdonvirta,WuandHawkins( 2024,np)observeaglobalcomputedivide,in
which “the geography of AI compute seems to be reproducing familiar patterns of global inequality.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 7 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 7
The future of compute capacity is likely to continue to be geographically concentrated (Ghahramani,
2023).
4.3. Connectivity and infrastructure
The infrastructureof AI ispredominantly owned bycommercial entities, meaning that thedata – and
the ability to derive insights from it – largely resides in the private sector. Much of it is commercially
availableforpurchase,andtheanalyticalcapabilitiesofbigdatahavelargelybeenbuiltby–andreside
in – industry (Crain,2016; Kitchin,2014). Despite offering a variety of different services (Lotz,2018),
a small handful of commercial entities have most of the world’s data, information flows (Moore &
Tambini,2021; Neef,2014; Omand & Phythian,2018, p. 145; Zuboff,2019), and computing capacity
(Lehdonvirta, 2023; Verdegem,2022).
Alphabet-Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon, and Microsoft are therefore able to control the node
of global information services (van Dijck et al.,2018). These companies do so in a way that was pre-
viously limited to telecommunications companies – assets that were historically government owned
(Howell & Potgieter,2020). Most internet users – nation state governments included – are dependent
on these companies for their infrastructural information services (Cohen,2017; Moore,2016; van
Dijck et al.,2018), including for computing (Lehdonvirta,2023). This can be seen in the context of
AI development specifically:
In the context of the current paradigm of building larger- and larger-scale AI systems, there
is no AI without Big Tech. With vanishingly few exceptions, every startup, new entrant, and
even AI research lab is dependent on these firms. All rely on the computing infrastructure of
Microsoft, Amazon, and Google to train their systems, and on those same firms’ vast consumer
market reach to deploy and sell their AI products (Kak et al.,2023).
Telecommunications infrastructure and undersea cables, which carry up to 99 percent of global
internet traffic (Kelton et al.,2022), are critical to AI. Over the past decade, there has been a shift
towards subsea cables built by large individual technology companies. Meta recently announced
Project Waterworth, which plans to connect the US, India, South Africa, Brazil, Australia and other
regions via a 50,000 km (31,000-mile) cable system. In addition, Big Tech companies have ownership
of most cloud infrastructure and are involved in projects from low Earth orbit satellites to laser data
transmission (Kelton et al.,2022). This challenges digital sovereignty in three ways, by impacting the
ability of a country to control its technological infrastructure, its data (data security), and ability to
provide internet-reliant services (Ganz, Camellini & Hine et al.,2024).
4.4. Energy generation and access
Since 2024, the role of tech companies in global energy generation and access has been elevated to a
nationalsecurityissue.Whilethereislimitedscholarshiptodate,policyandpublicdiscussionidentify
energy generation and access as key for AI. To state the obvious, “there is no AI without energy”
(IEA [International Energy Agency],2025). Leaders at COP29 debated the challenge of curbing AI
emissions and domestically in the US, an increasing focus on the intersection between AI and energy,
generation and access. For example, a September 2024 White House Roundtable considering the role
of energy in AI Infrastructure6 and October 2024 Memorandum on AI.7 On 23 May 2025, the White
House released an Executive Order that, among other things, designated AI data centres as “critical
6September 2024White House Roundtable on U.S. Leadership in AI Infrastructure.
7On12Sep2024,ReadoutofWhiteHouseRoundtableonU.S.LeadershipinAIInfrastructure https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2024/09/12/readout-of-white-house-roundtable-on-u-s-leadership-in-ai-infrastructure/
and on 24 Oct 2024, Memorandum on Advancing the United States’ Leadership in Artificial Intelligence; Harnessing Artificial
Intelligence to Fulfil National Security Objectives; and Fostering the Safety, Security, and Trustworthiness of Artificial
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 8 ---
8 Miah Hammond-Errey
defence facilities” and the nuclear reactors powering them as “defence critical electric infrastructure.”
It also mandates the rapid deployment of advanced nuclear technology to power AI infrastructure.8
In July 2025, America’s AI Action plan was released, which directly linked AI infrastructure and the
energy to power it, noting “AI is the first digital service in modern life that challenges America to
build vastly greater energy generation than we have today” (White House,2025 p. 14).9
4.5. Workforce
The technology workforce for AI and its underlying architectures is an area of emerging schol-
arly interest. “There are only a few companies that own exponential computing power, can attract
AI talent, and have access to data to develop and train advanced machine/deep learning models”
(Verdegem, 2021). The impact of the AI workforce component, or “tech talent” as it is sometimes
referred to, is increasingly considered within policymaking circles. For example, as part of the 2023
Quad Tech Network meeting, Koslosky (2023) explored the domestic and global shortages of the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce necessary for AI. While main-
taining a STEM workforce is critical, it is an often-overlooked component of strengthening national
criticaltechnologiescapabilities(Hammond-Errey, 2023).Moreover,asAssaadandHammond-Errey
(forthcoming 2025) note, “there is limited diversity in employer options for those with the skill sets
to work on AI. This means knowledge around AI systems becomes siloed and sparse.” Artifical intel-
ligence researchers revealed the power, influence and dominance of the technology companies in AI
research with limited public interest alternatives (Ahmed, Wahed & Thompson2023)
4.6. Economic power
Economic power is a result of the concentration of power across the architectures of AI listed above.
Economic power will be covered only briefly here due to the scope of this article; however, it is a topic
of increasing scholarly and policy interest. The top five American technology companies (Alphabet-
Google, Apple, Meta, Amazon, and Microsoft) have also amassed unprecedented economic power
(Lee, 2021; Moore,2016; Fernandez et al.,2021; Santesteban & Longpre,2020). They had cumulative
revenues of US$1.1 trillion in 2022, although their market capitalisation has dropped from a high of
US$9.5 trillion in 2021 to US$7.7 trillion in April 2023 (Lee,2021; Wall Street Journal, 2023abcde).
Their combined market capitalisation in 2021 was more than six times the size of Australia’s gross
domestic product (GDP; US$1.55 trillion), while their revenues were almost twice the total revenue
of the Australian governments (US$586 billion) in the same year (Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2023; World Bank,2023). The market for military AI is lucrative and growing and, in the US alone,
is projected to increase to 38.8 billion USD by 2028 (Schwarz,2024).
Stucke and Grunes (2016) set out a range of factors needed to assess digital platform economic
power, which include considerations relating to data, algorithms, network economies, economies
of scale and scope, coordination, limiting competition and data transferability. The value of goods
that passed through Amazon in 2022 (US$514 billion) exceeded the GDP of many countries – its
2021 revenue figure would place it in the top 30 countries for GDP (Amazon,2023, p. 23; World
Bank, 2023). Amazon’s merchant fees in 2022 brought in more revenue (US$117 billion) than most
states do through taxation (Lehdonvirta,2022, p. 3). In some cases, these companies have taken on
key functions akin to the judicial systems of nation-states – eBay rules on more financial disputes
Intelligence, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2024/10/24/memorandum-on-advancing-the-
united-states-leadership-in-artificial-intelligence-harnessing-artificial-intelligence-to-fulfill-national-security-objectives-
and-fostering-the-safety-security/. An outline of the implications for security can be seen here:https://www.lowyinstitute.
org/the-interpreter/where-harris-trump-agree-ai-beat-china.
823 May 2025, White House https://www.whitehouse.gov/fact-sheets/2025/05/fact-sheet-president-donald-j-trump-
deploys-advanced-nuclear-reactor-technologies-for-national-security-f872/
9https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Americas-AI-Action-Plan.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 9 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 9
(60 million) per year than any courts outside the United States hear on an annual basis (Lehdonvirta,
2022, p. 3).
4.7. Technology companies have accumulated power and governments are critically
dependent
Technology companies are central to functioning democratic societies. In addition to the concen-
tration of power outlined above, nation-state governments are critically dependent on Big Tech for
the provision of government services. It is in the domain of US state and Big Tech relations that the
consequences of the power concentration are already being felt. “Big Tech has become omnipresent
and omnipotent in the policy process” (Khanal et al.,2024, p. 12). Their influence and resources
result in semi-autonomous and semi-sovereign entities. States are also beginning to treat Big Tech
like sovereign actors (Khanal et al.,2024). The immense power of technology companies can be seen
in the geopolitical implications of their choices.
Awiderangeofcompaniesareattheforefrontofmanynationalsecuritythreats,fromdatasecurity
andcybersecuritytotelecommunicationsandcriticalinfrastructure.ManyofAustralia’sgovernment
agencies are heavily reliant on digital and technology services from the dominant players, ranging
from the provision of data cloud services, email and office systems to AI application trials. In July
2024, the Australian Government and Amazon announced an AU$2 billion partnership to build a
datacloudtostoreclassifiedAustralianmilitaryandintelligenceinformation.Thiswillseesecuredata
centres built in secret locations across the country to support the purpose-built Top-Secret Cloud,
which will be run by a local subsidiary of Amazon Web Services (Greene,2024).
Decision making about national security continues in government. However, it also increasingly
occurs in the private sector and especially within technology companies. Many of these decisions
are consequential. As the Australian Privacy Commissioner Carly Kind said, “the major platforms
are shaping society, they are not intermediaries” (Kind,2024). This creates new dynamics regard-
ing commercial decisions within companies as well as between government agencies, policymakers,
and private-sector companies. These dynamics – and the competing tensions and complexities – are
playing out in contemporary global conflicts.
This concentration of power presents new challenges, strategic and operational, to state resort-to-
force decision making. This article shows that the concentration of power across the architectures of
AI is indisputable and unlike any of the challenges to state sovereignty envisioned by Krasner (1999).
The relationship between the US nation state and US-based technology companies is changing.
Key technology actors are actively shaping the second Trump administration’s technology pos-
ture and relationship to technology. Military and intelligence apparatuses cannot function without
key technology companies. The latter control tools (among them, cloud systems or AI algorithms
aimed at image and sound recognition, behaviour prediction and military targeting) are essential
for surveilling adversaries (and “allies”) and, if needed, to anticipate their moves on the battlefield
(Coveri, Cozza & Guarascio,2025; Gawer,2022).
Increasingly,thisaccumulatedpowerisintersectingwithpoliticalandgovernanceprocessesinthe
US. For example, Meta, Amazon, Google, Microsoft and Uber – as well as the CEOs of OpenAI and
Apple – all made unprecedented tech donations of $1 million each to President-elect Donald Trump’s
inaugural fund (Harwell,2025). These same companies advocated for the Executive OrderRemoving
Barriers to American Leadership in Artificial Intelligencesigned by President Trump on 23 January
2025. The order sees the dismantling of AI oversight and prioritises commercial dominance over col-
laborative global governance (Shafiabady & O’Neil,2025). Four senior technology executives from
Meta, OpenAI and Palantir were also sworn in as senior US Army officers (Nieberg,2025). Another
example of the role of Big Tech is Elon Musk’s advisory role in the Trump administration and his
positionasaco-chairofa“governmentefficiency”panel,whichresultedinanunprecedentedconcen-
tration of power and conflicts of interest (Stone,2024). X and Meta “are using this power in new ways
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 10 ---
10 Miah Hammond-Errey
that declare war on facts, denigrate groups of people,10 enhance vulnerabilities for state-sponsored
interference,11 influenceforeignpoliticsanddecreaseinclusionandparticipation”(Hammond-Errey,
2025). Musk has also used X to endorse and promote far-right political candidates – subsequently
designated as extremists – in the United Kingdom and Germany (Kelly,2025).
Contemporary power is accumulated in and through the architectures of AI. The architectures of
AI are predominantly owned by technology companies, meaning that data and the ability to derive
insights from it reside largely in the private sector or are available for purchase (Crain,2016; Kitchin,
2014).Thisconcentrationofpowerpervadesenergygenerationandaccess,aswellasconnectivityand
workforce. It also combines with the existing concentration of economic power as well as policy and
decision-making influence. Thus, in the not-so-distant future, it may well be impossible for nation
state governments to operate their national infrastructure without service provision from AI tech-
nology companies. This leaves states open to companies influencing resort-to-force decision making,
either directly through coercion or indirectly through forms of influence on policy processes and
incentivisation.
5. The diffusion of national security decision making
The architectures of AI are hastening an existing trend: decision making about national security and
decisions that impact national security continue within government but are also increasingly occur-
ring outside government (Hammond-Errey,2024). This section shows how the influence of decision
makers in AI technology companies has diffused national decision making and created new national
security actors. This, in turn, has impacted national security and decision-making processes, includ-
ing on the resort to force. The architectures of AI are predominantly owned by commercial entities
(the data – and the ability to derive insights from it – largely reside in the private sector or is avail-
able for purchase) (Crain,2016; Kitchin,2014). Technology companies are increasingly influencing
government decision making, including on matters of war and security and are heavily involved
in public policy and shaping policy processes (Khanal et al.,2024). Their influence and resources
result in semi-autonomous and semi-sovereign entities. States are also beginning to treat Big Tech
like sovereign actors (Khanal et al.,2024). These are all signs of nation states recognising the power
technology companies have accumulated and foreshadow the potential they have to exercise it by
influence, coercion, or incentivisation.
Cyberspaceraisesquestionsaboutwhocountsasanationalsecuritydecisionmakerandhowintel-
ligence communities should interact with them (Zegart,2022, p. 274). Further, companies create, use
and control vast troves of personal data (Birch & Bronson,2022), data storage and computational
capabilities (Lehdonvirta,2023), and information flows (Santesteban & Longpre,2020). They have
billions of users (Kemp,2023) from whom they collect data and over whom they also have varying
degrees of influence (Davidson,2017; Griffin,2019; Zuboff,2019). Social reliance on digital infras-
tructureandprovidersofdigitalservicesmeansthatmanycompaniesareapotentialattacksurfacefor
national security threats in addition to being, increasingly, national security decision makers them-
selves (Hammond-Errey,2024). Now, heads of companies – often in foreign countries – are national
security actors. This adds a new dimension to decision making about war. For countries outside the
US,thisrequiresregulatingtechnologyanddigitalinfrastructurewhileamelioratingcitizenconcerns
about online harms and simultaneously considering government reliance on US technology compa-
nies. Technology companies have become important actors in modern conflicts, such as supporting
Ukraine since the Russian invasion in February 2022 (Bresnick, Luong & Curlee,2024).
The immense power of technology companies can be seen in the geopolitical implications of their
choices. A wide range of companies are at the forefront of many national security threats, from data
10https://theintercept.com/2025/01/09/facebook-instagram-meta-hate-speech-content-moderation/
11https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/meta-s-decision-ditch-fact-checking-gives-state-sponsored-influence-
operations-more
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 11 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 11
securityandcybersecuritytotelecommunicationsandcriticalinfrastructure.Decisionmakingabout
national security continues in government; however, it also increasingly occurs within technology
companies. Many of these decisions are consequential. Coveri, Cozza & Guarascio (2025, p. 2) argue
the interdependence between governments and technology companies… “challenges the traditional
distinction between the state and the market, blurring their boundaries and, most importantly, ques-
tioningthewillingness(andability)oftheformertocontrol(anddiscipline)thelatterinthecollective
interest.” Furthermore, according to military scholars, key tech figures and companies are “hyping
AI’s role in war” (Lushenko & Carter,2024). This creates new dynamics between commercial and
national security decisions within companies as well as between government agencies, policymakers
and private-sector companies. These dynamics – and the competing tensions and complexities – are
playing out in contemporary global conflicts, even as the global order is changing.
Increasingly, technology companies are making specific choices about which services to provide
to individuals and organisations at war. If a service, which an individual or company is reliant on, is
providedorremoved–orremovalisthreatened–itclearlyoperatesasaformofcoercionorinfluence.
As one research report sets out, over the course of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, at least 18 privately
held and publicly traded US technology companies offered services, often pro bono, in support of
Kyiv’s war effort (Bresnick et al.,2024). “These companies have provided support for communica-
tions and intelligence, reconnaissance, and surveillance (ISR) functions, delivered information that
helped inform target selection, as well as protected Ukraine’s critical infrastructure from cyberat-
tack” (Bresnick et al.,2024, p. 6). In July 2024, the BBC reported that Microsoft shut down email
and Skype accounts of Palestinians living outside Palestine and who tried to contact their families
in Gaza (Shalaby & Tidy,2024). In May 2025, after the US placed sanctions on the International
Criminal Court’s chief prosecutor, Karim Khan, Microsoft blocked his official email account (Quell,
2025). This has caused significant concern for policymakers around the world, including in Europe
and Australia, due to the reliance on technology providers and their ability to influence or coerce
nation state access to technology and limit decision-making scope.
Throughout Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Starlink provided online connections for civilian and
military coordination (Lerman & Zakrzewski,2022). The system – initially co-funded by Western
governments (predominantly for the service’s terminals) and SpaceX (for the connection) (Lerman
& Zakrzewski,2022; Metz,2022) – was delivered at the start of the war and continued throughout the
conflict, although not without disruptions at key moments and significant concern about continuity
(Giles, 2023). The high-profile and public reliance of the Ukrainian military and civilian infrastruc-
ture on private company services and essential digital infrastructure has exposed new vulnerabilities.
SpaceX signed an ongoing contract with the Pentagon to supply Starlink in Ukraine (Capaccio,2023)
in a more traditional arrangement.
Microsoft,AmazonandGooglehavealsoprovidedarangeofservicestoUkraine,includingcyber-
security, the migration of critical government data to the cloud and keeping Ukraine connected
during the Russian invasion (Bergengruen,2024). Ukraine’s use of tools provided by companies like
Palantir and Clearview also raises complicated questions about when and how invasive technology
should be used in wartime, as well as how far privacy rights should extend (Bergengruen,2024).
Horowitz (2023, 2024) provides an excellent outline of some of the legal considerations related to
technology companies providing digital services in situations of armed conflict, and particularly the
relationship between critical infrastructure companies, cyber offensives and defensive action that all
blend into the traditional role of the state.
The prominent public role of Elon Musk and Starlink technology provides insight into the signif-
icant ability of individuals and companies to impact and make national security decisions outside of
the traditional national security apparatus of government. As Giles notes, “companies are providing
capabilities that are vital to Ukraine’s national survival because they choose to, not because they are
beholden to any of the states involved in the conflict” (Giles,2023). This is clearly a concern to the
USestablishment:arecentGeorgetownCenterforSecurityandEmergingTechnology(CSET)report
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 12 ---
12 Miah Hammond-Errey
outlinesUStechnologycompanies’financialandoperationalentanglementsinChinaandarguesthat
such entanglements complicate their decision making in a potential Taiwan contingency (Bresnick
et al.,2024).
The technology landscape is evolving much more quickly than academic literature can capture.
Concentrated power across the architectures of AI is already playing out in different examples in
conflict and policymaking globally, including Ukraine and Russia as well as Israel and Gaza. It is
also impacting international institutions that adjudicate on global norms related to war, such as the
International Criminal Court. Leading AI technology companies and their leaders are all-new actors
in governing and decision making, including now in matters of war. They are unelected, largely unac-
countable, and wield immense power to covertly influence, coerce or even compel states to act in
accordance with their wishes. They are extremely powerful in each of the architectures of AI, and
governments are deeply dependent on them. Together, the concentration of power across the archi-
tectures of AI and diffused national security decision making decrease the scope of state decision
making, even in relation to the resort to force.
6. AI’s role in public opinion: curation, influence and interference
The role of AI is considered here in the context of shaping public opinion on war. AI is increas-
ingly used by online news providers to curate and prioritise information and news. The social media
platforms used most in Australia (Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and YouTube) as well as search
services, are owned and operated by the large technology companies (Meta and Google) that have
concentrated power across the architectures of AI. The AI algorithms and internal policies and pro-
cesses behind social media – and in particular content discovery, curation, and moderation – shape
public opinion. The applications and platforms we use “form a significant part of our information
environment and have the capacity to shape us, including what we see, the choices we are presented
with, what we think others believe, and ultimately how we might view the world” (Hammond-Errey,
2024b).
The role of public support in winning wars and the notion that wars are fought in the mind is cen-
tral to military doctrine in the West (Libicki,1995; Herbert & Kerr,2021). In contemporary Western
scholarship on the topic of adversary threats, the evolution of the use of public information cam-
paigns in warfare has given rise to notions of hybrid war and threats (Hoffman,2007), asymmetric
war (Thornton,2015) and grey-zone warfare (Hoffman,2016), as well as several related (and com-
peting) constructions to explain these phenomena (Galeotti,2016; Selhorst,2016). From a Western
perspective, information forms a part of a broader warfare strategy used mostly by nation states.
States use information and communication technology in pursuit of a competitive advantage over
an opponent. This is usually combined with other military activities and directed by military strat-
egy. In other words, states use the power of information and, increasingly, of public information to
influenceandachievestrategicresults(Hammond-Errey, 2017).Similarly,JanisBerzins( 2014)argues
that the Russian view of modern warfare is based on the idea that the main battlespace is in the mind.
Information is the principal tool in this fight, creating a version of reality that suits political and
military purposes at all levels of warfare (Berzins,2014, p. 5).
The interplay between public opinion and resort-to-force decision making in democracies has
been the subject of long-standing controversy (Tomz, Weeks & Yarhi-Milo,2020). Nevertheless, pub-
lic opinion is inextricably linked with war. “Because battle is a matter of politics, as well as combat,
the battlefield is not the only place where information is important. Information helps to shape opin-
ion: let’s go to war; let’s not go to war; let’s escalate and win an existing war; let’s disengage from that
war” (Seib,2021, pp. 185–186). Arguably, contemporary wars are more about control of the popu-
lation and the political decision-making process than about control over territory (Nissen,2015).
Thus, information dominance, both overt (public disinformation) and covert (hidden cyber and
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 13 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 13
infrastructure attacks, public opinion shaping), will almost certainly continue to evolve as an issue of
national security in unprecedented ways (Hammond-Errey,2016).
The digital landscape we rely on for economic growth, political stability and social interaction
has created an ecosystem that is vulnerable to information influence and interference at individual
and national levels (Hammond-Errey,2022). People live a significant portion of their lives online
and increasingly across the architectures of AI. This has the capacity to shape an individual, includ-
ing what they see, what their options are, what choices they have, what they think others believe, and
ultimatelyhowtheyviewtheworld(Hammond-Errey, 2024).Fragmentedmedialandscapesandpre-
cise targeting lead to an increase in political and social polarisation (Prummer,2020). An evolving
technology landscape, AI, and algorithmic content curation, as well as increased foreign interference
efforts, worsen the outlook.
Despite their ubiquity, understanding precisely how information and social media platforms
impact public opinion remains difficult (Bradshaw & Howard,2017), including in resort-to-force
decision making. It is, however, clear that the strategies and techniques used by malign actors
have an impact, and that their activities violate the norms of democratic practice (Bradshaw &
Howard, 2018). “The computational architecture underpinning major social media platforms has
so many parts as to defy understanding by any individual inquirer”(Lazar,2024, nfd). Large tech-
nology companies create, use and control vast troves of personal data (Birch & Bronson,2022).
They have billions of users (Kemp,2023) from whom they collect data and over whom they also
have varying degrees of influence (Davidson,2017; Griffin,2019; Zuboff,2019). They deploy com-
plex systems involving layers of human content moderation, platform design and amplification
algorithms that integrate standard programming, machine learning (ML) models, user interface
design and vast amounts of data, from both on-platform behaviour and tracked behaviour online
(Lazar,2022).
There is an urgent research need to explore how influence and interference work at the cogni-
tive level on contemporary information platforms and how big data and AI can influence behaviour
(Hammond-Errey,2024; Grahn, Häkkinen, & Taipalus,2024). Cognitive processes and vulnerabili-
ties such as perception and attention, emotion, decision making, memory metacognition, trust and
cognitive bias can be exploited in the digital ecosystem (Grahn & Pamment,2024). Since the broader
concept of influence refers to the shaping of people’s thoughts, beliefs and perceptions of the world,
it is important to gain a greater understanding of how mental and psychological processes con-
tribute to individuals’ susceptibility to such influence (Grahn & Taipalus,2025). This includes, for
instance, understanding how people process, store and retrieve information; how cognitive biases
affect decision making; and how emotion impacts judgment. By advancing such understanding, cog-
nitive science can contribute to a deeper comprehension of how disinformation influences human
behaviour (Grahn & Pamment,2024).
Foreign influence and interference psychologically target individuals to influence or manipulate
and alter perceptions of events by distorting the information environment in ways that benefit the
sender of the information (Starbird, Arif & Wilson,2019; Pamment & Isaksson,2024). Such actions
workbyreshapingindividuals’cognitions,orthementalframeworkspeopleusetounderstand,inter-
pret and respond to the world around them (Grahn & Pamment,2024). The technology-fuelled
digital landscape “allows … entities to utilise cyberspace to conduct operations that are tactically
and strategically similar and also lowers the costs of collaboration between foreign and domes-
tic malign entities” (Dowling,2021). Conflicts are increasingly waged in digital environments and
within the cognitive realm of individuals’ minds (Bērzin̦ š, 2019; Tashev, Purcell & McLaughlin,
2019).
The use of AI in social media is changing the political equation of public support and accumulat-
ing power in the technology companies that can, often opaquely, wield that power in their provision
of social media platforms. The focus of AI in social media is narrowed in this context to include the
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 14 ---
14 Miah Hammond-Errey
algorithms used for content discovery, curation, and moderation.12 However, it is situated as part
of the broader “information environment,”13 which comprises informational, cognitive and physical
dimensions (GAO [US Government of Accountability Office],2022) in an attempt to understand
“how human beings use information to influence the direction and outcome of competition and
conflict” (Ehlers & Blannin,2020). Using propaganda and information to influence the cognitive
capacities of individuals is used by a range of hostile actors for warfare, radicalisation, and disinfor-
mation (Claverie,2025). Cognitive processes such as attention, memory and emotional responses are
often exploited by influence operations, and understanding these processes offers insight into points
of vulnerability (Grahn & Pamment,2024).
The information environment provides a useful framework for understanding information and
technology challenges in three prongs: information or content – the information itself; digital land-
scape or infrastructure – the platforms and systems of creation, distribution and use; and cognitive
or human resilience – our own engagement with information and the social context within which it’s
embedded (Hammond-Errey,2022). The information environment “encompasses everything from
human influence right through to information warfare, from peacetime to acute, large-scale conflict”
(Hammond-Errey,2022, np). Many aspects of the information environment impact deliberations on
resort to force. The concept of the information environment is vital because it is a reminder that to
influence public opinion, content alone is not enough. To be effective, attempts to influence public
opinion must have some cognitive impact or influence. Taken in conjunction with the concentration
ofpowerinthearchitecturesofAIandthecapacitytoimpactreal-worlddecisionsandpublicopinion
at once, this represents unprecedented change.
The capacity of social media and news media companies to influence our information environ-
ment is undeniable. In the context of content moderation, Donovan (2019) writes, “At every level of
the tech stack, corporations are placed in positions to make value judgments regarding the legitimacy
of content, including who should have access, and when and how.” While most of the conversation
about AI and mis- and disinformation revolves around content moderation, its impact is limited
until it is distributed (Hammond-Errey,2024c). Thus, sharing information is an essential consider-
ation of AI and public opinion. This explains why the lens of the tech stack is so valuable. Looking
at the infrastructure dimension of the information environment highlights how the internet infras-
tructure globally has become an “emerging terrain of disinformation” (Bradshaw & Denardis,2022).
The technical structure of social media platforms leaves users vulnerable to information influence
and interference (Hammond-Errey,2019), including from foreign actors and algorithmic processes.
Social media can be used to erode trust in political institutions; to spread harmful disinformation;
and to incite hate, polarisation, and anti-democratic sentiment (Khalil,2024).
Most Australians are using social media and increasingly use it to access their news.14 The market
share of services used by adult users (age 16–64) is increasingly narrow in sectors such as search,
where Google accounts for 94.5 percent of the share (Digital 2024,2024, p.41), and in social media,
whereMetadominates(Facebook,WhatsApp,andInstagram). 15 Thismeansthattheirabilitytoshape
12Social media platforms use a variety of techniques, mostly focused on engagement to exert influence over their users.
These include algorithmic discovery, which increases the influence and editorial power apps have over user experiences and
content. Social media platform algorithms weight some features and characteristics differently among a wide array of features
including interests, locations, likes and preferences, and social connections such as followers and friends.
13The term information environment, originally a military term, has been the subject of many independent works. An oft
quoted US military doctrine defines the Information Environment is “the aggregate of the individuals, organizations, and
systems that collect, process, disseminate or act on information.” Joint Publication 3-13, Information Operations. US Defense
Technical Informational Center, 27 November 2012, Incorporating Change July 2018.
14In Australia, with a population of 26.57 million people, there are 33.59 million mobile connections (126.4% of popula-
tion), 25.31 million individuals using the internet (94.9% of population) and 20.80 million social media identities (78.3% of
population) (Digital 2024,2024, p. 19).
15The following percentage of Australians are users for the following platforms: Facebook (78.2%), Facebook Messenger
(69.9%), Instagram (62.4), WhatsApp (44.8%), TikTok (40%), iMessage (39.6%), Snapchat (33%) and X (29.6%) (Digital 2024,
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 15 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 15
audiences’ thinking and influence behaviour is high, as are their data collection capabilities. Social
media saturation is very high, with almost all Australians using social media services.16
Social media platforms use a variety of techniques, mostly focused on increasing engagement,
to exert influence over their users. These include algorithmic discovery and recommender systems,
which increase the influence and editorial power applications and platforms have over user experi-
ences,includingthecontenttheysee.Somesocialmediaplatforms,suchasTikTok,weighalgorithms
more heavily towards interests (and interest categories) rather than social connections, like followers
and friends, as Facebook does (Hammond-Errey,2024b). The weighting of algorithms is important
as this significantly impacts user experience, including content selection and information “bubbles,”
however, they are largely opaque to the user and constantly evolving.
Givenincreasedpoliticalpolarisationaswellassocialmediainfluenceandinterference–including
in the context of the Israel-Hamas/Gaza conflict – the ability to obtain and maintain public support
for military action includes a serious social media dimension. Given the opacity of social media algo-
rithms, it is extremely difficult to conduct research. However, an example of public opinion regarding
who shot down MH17 is indicative of the power of censored media over public opinion. In 2014 in
Russia, where information is heavily mediated by the state, 97 percent of Russians did not believe
Russian separatists were responsible for shooting down MH17, almost the inverse of public opinion
globally (Luhn,2014). Social media platforms are actively shaping public opinion about conflict and
influencingwhatuserscansee,shapingtheirperceptionsaboutwhethergovernmentscanandshould
resort to force. In short, technology companies are moderating, shaping, influencing and ultimately
gaining power and control over public opinion.
7. Discussion and implications for policymakers
The thesis of this article is that the role of AI in concentrating power, diffusing national security
decision making, and shaping public opinion alters the political calculus and practical realities of
going to war. There are key policy implications and considerations that follow from this, primarily
focused on the imperative to improve understanding of the architectures of AI, the technology stack,
and how they impact deliberations on the use of force.
Policymakers need an increased understanding of the tech stack as well as the inherent interde-
pendencies and vulnerabilities in the technology ecosystem and the fragility of the architectures of
AI. Based on this analysis, I recommend that technology literacy training programmes be designed
specifically for politicians as well as policy, intelligence and military leaders. Moreover, this should
be delivered by independent organisations. I also recommend that government and Defence invest
in mapping the architectures of digital infrastructure and AI capabilities within their borders and
regions. Moreover, governments should invest in research to develop a comprehensive picture of
the physical and digital architectures of AI, including critical dependencies and vulnerabilities for
Australia, our allies and the region, and inform how access and power are distributed. Governments
should also fund the forecasting of future technology dependencies, specifically for their national
government, defence forces and intelligence functions, in the next 2-5 years but also in longer term
investments.
There is an urgent need to significantly increase awareness of government reliance on the archi-
tectures of AI, especially for critical government functions and functions of war. I recommend that
2024, p. 24). Facebook remains the favourite platform for nearly one in four Australians, who spend an average of 20 hours and
15 minutes per month. Twenty years after its launch, Facebook is still the leading social media platform in Australia (Digital
2024, 2024). Digital 2024 Australia also reports that TikTok has the highest average time per Android user of any social app,
with 42 hours and 13 minutes per month – equating to almost one and a half hours per day using the platform. In second
place is YouTube, with the average user spending 21 hours and 36 minutes per month on its Android app. Australians stand
out among top economies as the users spending the most time on Snapchat, with 17 hours and 2 minutes and 619 sessions per
month. That means that users open the Snapchat app over 20 times a day (Digital 2024,2024).
16Ibid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 16 ---
16 Miah Hammond-Errey
government,militaryandintelligenceleadershipbeeducatedaboutthesethroughresearch,establish-
ment of advisory boards, forums and professional training. It is also recommended that intelligence
agencies increase intelligence collection on critical and potential capabilities and that independent
technical advisors are appointed, funded and security cleared to support intelligence agencies in this
task. Without this, future government decision making will likely be constrained. Governments need
to increase national investment to build public sovereign capabilities where needed. I also recom-
mend governments invest in understanding now in further understanding biology and technology
intersections to create safe and secure cyber physical systems over the horizon. Developing cognitive
resilience in Australian leaders and people will be vital for national survival.
An increase in emerging technology literacy is urgently needed across governments. I recom-
mend that governments immediately prioritise increasing their depth and scope of understanding
of technology ecosystems, policies, and impacts on governing, security, warfare and public safety.
This increase in awareness must include technology developments, the role of technology policy in
Australia and globally, and the role that multi-lateral technology forums play in affecting AI capa-
bilities and dependencies across the whole of government. This must be delivered by organisations
that reflect technical and security expertise, are independent and include a technology ecosystem
perspective as well as consideration of social harms and national security threats. This must occur
immediately, or the window for shaping this ecosystem will be lost.
More research on social media and its impact on human cognition as well as the functions of gov-
ernment is urgently needed. Governments need to invest heavily in research, including research on
democracy, the use of the information environment to influence public decisions on resort to force,
andonforeigninterference.Irecommendthatgovernmentsensuredataisavailablefromsocialmedia
platforms for this research, either through negotiation or regulation. Moreover, I recommend that
funding for this research be made available to a wide range of researchers, civil society groups and
academicinstitutionsandconsortiumstoensureitisrepresentativeofstatedemographics.Thereisan
urgent research need to explore how foreign influence, and interference works at the cognitive level
on contemporary information platforms and how AI can be used to understand and influence peo-
ple’s behaviour. I recommend governments invest immediately in research that reveals how cognitive
processes and vulnerabilities (such as perception and attention, emotion, decision making, memory
metacognition and trust) as well as cognitive biases can be exploited by malign actors in the digital
ecosystem. Governments must also be willing to ensure that algorithmic processes as well as internal
policies and procedures within social media service providers contribute to, or are at least consistent
with the democratic principles of the country of sale. This is essential and requires immediate action.
8. Conclusion
This article has demonstrated how the architectures of AI – encompassing data, connectivity, energy,
compute capacity and workforce – are consequential for the independent and sovereign deci-
sion making of governments on matters of war and peace. By concentrating power and diffusing
national security decision making, and by shaping public opinion through AI-driven platforms,
technology companies have emerged as national security actors. The scope and concentration of
power within these firms mean that most nation states possess, or will soon possess, less auton-
omy in resort-to-force decisions, whether through direct coercion, indirect influence or strategic
incentives.
The power asymmetries between governments and technology companies continue to grow, chal-
lenging a foundational principle of state sovereignty: the independent authority to declare and wage
war.Ifnationstatesaretoretaintheirsovereignindependenceinthisdomain,significantpoliticalwill
and urgent action are required. Policymakers must develop a deeper understanding of the interde-
pendencies and vulnerabilities inherent in the technology ecosystem and devise strategies to contain
the influence of private companies.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 17 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 17
Competing interests. The author declares none.
Funding statement. The author declares none.
References
Ahmed, N., Muntasir W ahed, & Thompson Neil C (2023). The growing influence of industry in AI research.Science 379,
884–886. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade2420
Amazon. (2023). 2022 Amazon Annual Report. Amazon.com Inc., 25 January. Retrieved April 20, 2023, fromhttps://ir.
aboutamazon.com/annual-reports-proxies-and-shareholder-letters/default.aspx
Andrejevic, M. (2013). Infoglut: How too much information is changing the way we think and know. Routledge.
Bell, G. (2018). The character of future indo-pacific land forces.Australian Army Journal, XIV, 171–184.
Bergengruen, V .(2024) How Tech Giants Turned Ukraine Into an AI War Lab, Time. Retrieved September 20, 2024, from
https://time.com/6691662/ai-ukraine-war-palantir/
Berzins, J. (2014). ‘Russia’s New Generation Warfare in Ukraine: Implications for Latvian Defense Policy’,Policy Paper 2
(National Defence Academy of Latvia Center for Security and Strategic Research).
Bērzin̦ š, J. (2019). Not ‘Hybrid’ but New Generation Warfare. InRussia’s Military Strategy and Doctrine(pp. 157–184). The
Jamestown Foundation.
Birch, K., & Bronson, K. (2022). Big Tech.Science as Culture, 31(1), 1–14.https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2022.2036118
Bode, I. (2023). Practice-based and public-deliberative normativity: Retaining human control over the use of force.European
Journal of International Relations, 29(4), 990–1016.https://doi.org/10.1177/13540661231163392
Bradshaw, S., & Denardis, L.(2022).PlatformGovernance:InternetInfrastructureasanEmergingTerrainofDisinformation,
July 4, 2022, Centre for International Governance Innovation. https://www.cigionline.org/the-four-domains-of-global-
platform-governance/
Bradshaw, S., & Howard, P . N. (2017). Troops, Trolls and Troublemakers: A Global Inventory of Organized Social Media
Manipulation. The Computational Propaganda Project. Retrieved fromhttp://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/troops-trolls-
and-trouble-makers-a-global-inventory-of-organized-social-media-manipulation/
Bradshaw, S., & Howard, P . N.(2018). Why does Junk News Spread So Quickly Across Social Media? Algorithms,Advertising
and Exposure in Public Life. Knight Foundation Working Paper. Retrieved fromhttps://kf-site-production.s3.amazonaws.
com/media_elements/files/000/000/142/original/Topos_KF_White-Paper_Howard_V1_ado.pdf
Bratton, B. H. (2015). The stack: On software and sovereignty. MIT Press.
Bresnick, S., Luong, N., & Curlee, K. (2024). Which Ties Will Bind?Center for Security and Emerging Technology. February
2024 https://doi.org/10.51593/20230037
Capaccio, A. (2023). Elon Musk’s SpaceX Wins Pentagon Deal for Starlink in Ukraine. Bloomberg, 2 June. Retrieved
June 13 2023, from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-06-01/musk-s-spacex-wins-pentagon-deal-for-its-
starlink-in-ukraine#xj4y7vzkg
Claverie, B. (2025). Cognitive warfare: The new battlefield exploiting our brains, Polytechnique insights.
Cohen, J. E. (2017). Law for the platform economy.University of California, Davis Law Review, 51, 133–204.
Collins, C., Dennehy, D., Conboy, K., & Mikalef, P . (2021). Artificial intelligence in information systems research: A
systematic literature review and research agenda.International Journal of Management, 60, 1–17.
Coveri, A., Cozza, C., & Guarascio, D. 2025. (2025). Big tech and the us digital-military-industrial complex.Intereconomics,
60(2), 81–87.https://doi.org/10.2478/ie-2025-0017.
Crain, M. (2016). The limits of transparency: data brokers and commodification.New Media & Society, 20(1), 88–104.
Daigle, B. (2021). ‘Data Centers Around the World: A Quick Look’,United States International Trade Commission, May,
accessed 28 November 2023,https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/executive_briefings/ebot_data_centers_around_the_
world.pdf
Davidson, D. (2017). Facebook targets ‘insecure’ young people. The Australian, 1 May. Retrieved May 12, 2023,
from https://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/facebook-targets-insecure-young-people-to-sell-ads/news-story/
a89949ad016eee7d7a61c3c30c909fa6
Deeks, A., Lubell, N., & Murray, D. (2019). Machine learning, artificial intelligence, and the use of force by states.Journal of
National Security Law and Policy, 4, 1–25.
Department of Industry, Science and Resources. (2024).Supporting responsible AI: discussion paper, p. 5. Retrieved May 25,
2024, from,https://consult.industry.gov.au/supporting-responsible-ai
Digital 2024. (2024). We are Social, Australia (p. 19). Retrieved September 20, 2024, fromhttps://wearesocial.com/au/blog/
2024/01/digital-2024/
Donovan, J. (2019). Navigating the tech stack: When, where and how should we moderate content?Centre for International
Governance Innovation. Retrieved September 20, 2024, from https://www.cigionline.org/articles/navigating-tech-stack-
when-where-and-how-should-we-moderate-content/
Dowling, M. E. (2021). Foreign interference and Australian electoral security in the digital era. Australian Journal of
International Affairs, 76(1), 40–56.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 18 ---
18 Miah Hammond-Errey
Edler, J., Blind, K., Kroll, H., & Schubert, T. (2023). Technology sovereignty as an emerging frame for innovation
policy. Defining rationales, ends and means. Research Policy, 52(6). https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0048733323000495?via%3Dihub
Edward, W .(2020). The Uberisation of work: The challenge of regulating platform capitalism. A commentary.International
Review of Applied Economics, 34(4), 512–521.
Ehlers, R., & Blannin, P . (2020). Making Sense of the Information Environment.Small Wars Journal. Retrieved September
10, 2023, fromhttps://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/making-sense-information-environment
Eichensehr, K. (2019). Digital Switzerland.University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 167, 665.
Erskine, T. (2024). Before algorithmic Armageddon: Anticipating immediate risks to restraint when AI infiltrates decisions to
wage war.Australian Journal of International Affairs, 78(2), 175–190.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2345636
Erskine, T., & Miller, S. E. (2024). AI and the decision to go to war: Future risks and opportunities.Australian Journal of
International Affairs, 78(2), 135–147.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2349598
Fernandez, R., Klinge, T. J., Hendrikse, R., & Adriaans, I. (2021). How big tech is becoming the government. Tribune, 5
February. Retrieved March 22, 2022, from,https://tribunemag.co.uk/2021/02/how-big-tech-became-the-government
Galeotti, M. (2016). Hybrid, ambiguous, and non-linear? How new is Russia’s ‘new way of war’?.Small Wars & Insurgencies,
27(2), 282–301.
Ganz, A., Camellini, M., & Hine, E. (2024). Submarine cables and the risks to digital sovereignty.Minds and Machines, 34,
31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-024-09683-z
GAO [US Government of Accountability Office] . (2022). Information Environment, Opportunities and Threats to DOD’s
national Security Mission (GAO-22-104714). Retrieved September 2023, fromhttps://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-104714.
pdf
Gawer, A. (2022). Digital platforms and ecosystems: remarks on the dominant organizational forms of the digital age.
Innovation, 24(1), 110–124.
Giles, K. (2023). Tech giants hold huge sway in matters of war, life and death. That should concern us all. The Guardian.
12 Sep 2023https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/sep/12/tech-giants-war-elon-musk-ukraine-starlink
Grahn, H., Häkkinen, T., & Taipalus, T.(2024).CognitiveSecurityinaChangingWorld:CitizenPerceptionsDuringFinland’s
NATO Joining Process. In M. Lehto (Ed.),Proceedings of the 23rd European Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security
(23, 165–171).
Grahn, H., & Pamment, J. (2024). Exploitation of psychological processes in information influence operations: Insights from
cognitive science. Lund University, Psychological Defence Research Institute Working Paper, 2024:4.
Grahn, H., & Taipalus, T. (2025). Defining Comprehensive Cognitive Security in the Digital Era: Literature Review and
Concept Analysis. Journal of Information Warfare, 24(2), 39–59. https://www.jinfowar.com/journal/volume-24-issue-2/
defining-comprehensive-cognitivesecurity-digital-era-literature-review-concept-analysis
Greene, A. (2024). Amazon wins contract to store ‘top-secret’ Australian military intelligence. ABC. 4 Jul 2024https://www.
abc.net.au/news/2024-07-04/amazon-contract-top-secret-australian-military-intelligence/104057196
Griffin, P .(2019). Facebook won’t give up its insidious practices without a fight. Noted, 22 March.
Gyngell, A., & Wesley, M. (2007). Making Australian foreign policy(2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hammond-Errey, M. (2016) Information Influence in an Era of Global Insecurity and Digital Connectivity (Russian
Disinformation Strategies and Hybrid War: Implications for Government and National Security Operations) Master’s
Thesis, ANU
Hammond-Errey, M. (2017) 28 September 2017, A Perpetual Conflict of Ideas?Strategy Bridgehttps://thestrategybridge.org/
the-bridge/2017/9/28/a-perpetual-conflict-of-ideas
Hammond-Errey, M. (2019). Understanding and Assessing Information Influence and Foreign Interference. Journal of
Information Warfare, 18(1), 1–22. Winter 2019.
Hammond-Errey, M. (2022). Dealing with disinformation: A critical new mission area for AUSMIN. United States Studies
Centre. 5 December 2022.
Hammond-Errey M. (2023). Building the Quad Technology Workforce Pipeline and Research Relationships. ANU National
Security College. Retrieved November 20, 2023, fromhttps://nsc.crawford.anu.edu.au/publication/21660/building-quad-
technology-workforce-pipeline-and-research-relationships
Hammond-Errey, M.(2024). Big Data, Emerging Technologies and Intelligence: National Security Disrupted. United Kingdom:
Routledge.
Hammond-Errey, M. (2024b). Should Australia ban TikTok?, 18 June 2024, Lowy Interpreter,https://www.lowyinstitute.org/
the-interpreter/byte-sized-diplomacy-should-australia-ban-tiktok
Hammond-Errey, M. (2024c). Understanding technology as an ecosystem is the first step to tackling online harms,
22 Oct 2024, Lowy Interpreter,https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/understanding-technology-ecosystem-first-
step-tackling-online-harms
Hammond-Errey, M.(2025). Meta power move is about more than fact checking. Lowy Interpreter 15 Jan 2025,https://www.
lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/meta-power-move-about-more-fact-checking(accessed 15 Jan 2025).
Harwell, D. (2025). Trump vilified tech giants. Now they’re giving him millions. Washington Post. January 11,
2025. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2025/01/11/trump-big-tech-inauguration-zuckerberg-bezos-google/
(Last accessed 18 Jan 2025)
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 19 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 19
Hendell, G. (2023). The Use of Force by States Under International Law. Available at:https://theforge.defence.gov.au/article/
use-force-states-under-international-law(Accessed: 11 July 2024).
Herbert, L., & Kerr, J.(2021). On Cyber-Enabled Information Warfare and Information Operations.https://doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780198800682.013.15.
Hershkovitz, S. (2022). The Future of National Intelligence. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 2022
Hoffman, F . G.(2007). Conflict in the 21st century: The rise of hybrid wars. Arlington, Virginia: Potomac Institute for Policy
Studies).
Hoffman, F . G.(2016). The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict: Protracted, Gray Zone, Ambiguous, and Hybrid Modes of
War. In2016 Index of U.S. Military Strength. (p. 26). The Heritage Foundation.
Horowitz, J. (2023). Digital Tech Companies in War: What is the Law? What are the Risks? October 13 2023.https://www.
justsecurity.org/89463/digital-tech-companies-in-war-what-is-the-law-what-are-the-risks/
Horowitz, J. (2024). One click from conflict: Some legal considerations related to technology companies providing digital
services in situations of armed conflict.Chicago Journal of International Law, 24(2), 305–337.
Howell, B. E., & Potgieter, P . H.(2020). Politics, policy and fixed-line telecommunications provision: Insights from Australia.
Telecommunications Policy, 44(7), 1–19.
IEA [International Energy Agency]. 2025. Energy and AI, World Energy Outlook. Special Report. Retrieved September 02,
2025, fromhttps://www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai
Kak, A., West, S. M., & Whittaker, M.(2023).Makenomistake—AIisownedbyBigTech,MITTechnologyReview,December
5, 2023,https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/12/05/1084393/make-no-mistake-ai-is-owned-by-big-tech/
Kelly, L. (2025) Musk extends political tentacles into UK, Germany. The Hill. 6 Jan 2025 https://thehill.com/policy/
international/5066254-musk-extends-political-tentacles-into-uk-germany/(Accessed 7 Jan 2025).
Kelton, M., Sullivan, M., Rogers, Z., Bienvenue, E., & Troath, S. (2022). Virtual sovereignty? Private internet capital, digital
platforms and infrastructural power in the United States.International Affairs, 98(6), 1977–1999.https://doi.org/10.1093/
ia/iiac226
Kemp, S. (2023). Digital 2023. We are social, 26 January. Retrieved April 05 2023, fromhttps://wearesocial.com/au/blog/2023/
01/the-changing-world-of-digital-in-2023-2/
Kent, S. (1966). Strategic Intelligence for American World Policy. 1966, p. vii. Princeton University Press
Khalil, L. (2024). Overcoming digital threats to democracy: Using deliberative democracy to enhance trust and legitimacy in
digital spaces.Lowy Institute. 20 February 2024.
Khanal S., Zhang, H., & Taeihagh, A. (2024). Why and how is the power of Big Tech increasing in the policy process?The
case of generative AI Policy and Society, 44(1), 52–69.https://doi.org/10.1093/polsoc/puae012
Kind, C. (2024). On Technology & Security Podcast, hosted by Dr Miah Hammond-Errey. TS Episode 21, Privacy, data, AI
and tech power with Australian Privacy Commissioner Carly Kind. Retrieved September 10, 2024, fromhttps://miahhe.
com/episode-21
Kitchin, R. (2014). The data revolution: big data, open data, data infrastructures & their consequences. London: SAGE.
Koslosky, L.(2023).QuadcollaborationforSTEMworkforcegrowth.ANUNationalSecurityCollege.RetrievedNovember20,
2023, fromhttps://nsc.anu.edu.au/national-security-college/content-centre/research/quad-collaboration-stem-workforce-
growth
Krasner, S. D. (1999). Sovereignty: Organized Hypocrisy. Princeton University Press, ProQuest Ebook Central.
Lazar, S. (2022). Legitimacy, Authority, and Democratic Duties of Explanation, Forthcoming in Oxford Studies in Political
Philosophy. This version was presented to the Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy workshop, Tucson Arizona. October
2022.
Lazar, S. (2024). Legitimacy, Authority, and Democratic Duties of Explanation. In D. Sobel & S. Wall (Eds.),Oxford Studies in
Political Philosophy Volume 10, Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy (Oxford. 2024 online edn Oxford Academic. 30 Apr.
2024).
Lee, J . (2021). Big data for liberal democracy. The Australian, 5 March. Retrieved March 12, 2022, from https://www.
theaustralian.com.au/inquirer/big-data-for-liberal-democracy/news-story/10ed6d4d8b01677955fc468d3751a4b7
Lehdonvirta, V . (2022). Cloud Empires: How Digital Platforms Are Overtaking the State and How We Can Regain Control.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lehdonvirta, V .(2023). ‘The political geography of AI infrastructure,’Oxford Internet Institute, accessed 28 November 2023,
https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/projects/the-political-geography-of-ai-infrastructure/
Lehdonvirta, V ., Wu, B., & Hawkins, Z.(2024). Compute North vs. Compute South: The Uneven Possibilities of Compute-
based AI Governance Around the Globe.Nature. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/8yp7z
Lerman, R. & Zakrzewski, C. (2022). Elon Musk’s Starlink Is Keeping Ukrainians Online When Traditional Internet Fails.
WASH. POST.
Libicki, M. (1995). What is Information warfare?National Defense University. Retrieved September 10, 2024, fromhttps://
apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/tr/ADA367662
Lin, H., & Jaclyn, K. (2021). On Cyber-Enabled Information Warfare and Information Operations. In P. Cornish(Ed.),The
Oxford Handbook of Cyber Security, Oxford Handbooks(2021 edn, pp. 251–272). Oxford Academic. Retrieved December
8 , 2021, fromhttps://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198800682.013.15
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 20 ---
20 Miah Hammond-Errey
Lotz, A. (2018, March 24). “Big tech” isn’t one big monopoly – It’s 5 companies all in different businesses.The Conversation.
https://theconversation.com/big-tech-isnt-one-big-monopoly-its-5-companies-all-in-different-businesses-92791
Luhn, A. (2014). MH17: Vast majority of Russians believe Ukraine downed plane, poll finds, The Guardian UK. Retrieved
December 2, 2015, fromhttps://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/30/mh17-vast-majority-russians-believe-ukraine-
downed-plane-poll
Lushenko, P ., & Carter, K.(2024) A new military-industrial complex: How tech bros are hyping AI’s role in war, October 7,
2024, https://thebulletin.org/2024/10/a-new-military-industrial-complex-how-tech-bros-are-hyping-ais-role-in-war/
Metz, C. (2022). Elon Musk backtracks, saying his company will continue to fund internet service in Ukraine. The New York
Times. Retrieved April 19 2023, from,https://www.nytimes.com/live/2022/10/15/world/russia-ukraine-war-news#musk-
ukraine-internet-starlink
Moore, M. (2016). Tech giants and civic power. London: King’s College London Policy Institute.
Moore, M., & Tambini, D.(Eds.). (2021).Regulating Big Tech: Policy Responses to Digital Dominance. Oxford University Press.
Neef, D. (2014). Digital exhaust: What everyone should know about big data, digitization and digitally driven innovation. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Dale Neef.
Neilsen, R., & Pontbriand, K . (2025). “Hands off the keyboard”: NATO’s cyber-defense of civilian critical infrastructure.
Defence Studies, 519–542.
Nieberg, P .(2025). Army bringing in big tech executives as lieutenant colonels. Task and Purpose.https://taskandpurpose.
com/military-life/army-reserve-lt-col-tech-execs
Nissen, T. E. (2015). #TheWeaponizationOfSocialMedia- @Characteristics_of_ Contemporary_Conflicts . Copenhagen,
Denmark: Royal Danish Defence College).
Omand, D., & Phythian, M. (2018). Principled spying: the ethics of secret intelligence. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Pamment, J., & Isaksson, E. (2024). Lund University Psychological Defence Research Institute Psychological Defence:
Concepts and principles for the 2020s MPF REPORT SERIES 6/2024. https://mpf.se/psychological-defence-agency/
publications/archive/2024-10-28-psychological-defence-concepts-and-principles-for-the-2020s
Perrigo, B. (2024). Exclusive: New Research Finds Stark Global Divide in Ownership of Powerful AI Chips, Time Magazine
AUGUST 28, 2024 8:00 AM EDT. Retrieved September 10, 2024, from https://time.com/7015330/ai-chips-us-china-
ownership-research
Prummer, A. (2020). Micro-targeting and polarization.Journal of Public Economics, 188.
Quell, M. (2025). Trump’s sanctions on ICC prosecutor have halted tribunal’s work. AP News. Retrieved June 1, 2025,
from https://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/trumps-sanctions-icc-prosecutor-halted-tribunals-work-12182
4057
Richmond, B. (2019). A day in the life of data. Melbourne: Consumer Policy Research Centre.
Rogers, Z., & Bienvenue, E. M. (2021). Combined Information Overlay for Situational Awareness in the Digital-
Anthropological Terrain.Cyber Defense Review, 89–107. Summer 2021-2022.
Sadowski, J. (2020). Too Smart: How Digital Capitalism is Extracting Data, Controlling Our Lives, and Taking Over the World.
MIT Press.
Santesteban, C., & Longpre, S. (2020). How big data confers market power to big tech: leveraging the perspective of data
science. Antitrust Bulletin, 65(3), 459–485.
Schaake, M. (2024a). The Tech Coup: How to Save Democracy from Silicon Valley. Princeton University Press.
Schaake, M. (2024b). Tech Companies aren’t just going to war. They’re owning the battlefield. Fast Company. Retrieved
August 10, 2024, fromhttps://www.fastcompany.com/91192057/tech-companies-arent-just-going-to-war-theyre-owning-
the-battlefield
Schwarz, E. (2024). Unicorns for Uniforms: On the Problematic Allure of VC Investments in Defence, Opinio Juris.
Retrieved August 10, 2024, from https://opiniojuris.org/2024/s09/18/unicorns-for-uniforms-on-the-problematic-allure-
of-vc-investments-in-defence/
Seib, P .(2021). Information at War. Journalism, disinformation and modern warfare. Cambridge UK: Polity.
Selhorst, T. (2016). Russia’s Perception Warfare: The development of Gerasimov’s doctrine in Estonia and Georgia and its
application in Ukraine.Militaire Spectator, 148–164. Jaargang 185 (Nummer 4 – 2016).
Shafiabady, N., & O’Neil, A. (2025). America first, ethics second: The implications of Trump’s AI Executive
Order, Lowy Institute. https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/america-first-ethics-second-implications-trump-s-
ai-executive-order
Shalaby, M., & Tidy, J.(2024). Palestinians say Microsoft unfairly closing their accounts, BBC, 11 July 2024https://www.bbc.
com/news/articles/cger582weplo
Sommer, U., Matania, E., & Hassid, N. (2023). The rise of companies in the cyber era and the pursuant shift in national
security.Political Science, 75(2), 140–164.https://doi.org/10.1080/00323187.2023.2278499
Starbird, K., Arif, A., & Wilson, T. (2019). Disinformation as collaborative work: Surfacing the participatory
nature of strategic information operations. Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction , 3(CSCW),
1–26.
Stone, P .(2024) Musk’s conflicts of interest as Trump adviser could benefit him, experts warn. The Guardian.https://www.
theguardian.com/technology/2024/dec/23/elon-musk-conflict-of-interest-benefits(Accessed 20 Jan 2025).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 21 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 21
Stucke, M., & Grunes, A. (2016). Big Data and Competition Policy. Retrieved November 03, 2025, fromhttps://doi.org/10.
1093/law:ocl/9780198788133.001.0001
Tashev, B., Purcell, M., & McLaughlin, B. (2019). ‘Russia’s information warfare: Exploring the cognitive dimension.MCU
Journal, 10(2), 129–147.
Thornton, R. (2015). The Changing Nature of Modern Warfare.The RUSI Journal, 160(4), 40–48.
T omz, M., Weeks, J. L. P ., & Y arhi-Milo, K. (2020). Public opinion and decisions about military force in democ-
racies. International Organization, 74(1), 119–143. Retrieved August 10, 2024, from https://www.jstor.org/stable/2689
2862
T op500 2024. (2024). ‘Lists, Top 500 June 2024,Top500, accessed 12 July 2024, 2023,https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/
2024/06/
T saih, R. H., Chang, H. L., Hsu, C.-C., & Y en, D.(2023).TheAITech-StackModel. Communication of the ACM,66(3),69–77.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3568026.
UK Department for Science, Innovation and T echnology . (2023). Independent review of the future of compute: Final
report and recommendations(Led by Zoubin Ghahramani FRS).https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/future-of-
compute-review/the-future-of-compute-report-of-the-review-of-independent-panel-of-experts#introduction-from-the-
expert-panel
van Dijck, J., Poell, T., & de W aal, M. (2018). The platform society: Public values in a connective world. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Verdegem, P .(2022). Dismantling AI Capitalism: The Commons as an Alternative to the Power Concentration of Big Tech.
AI & Society, 39, 727–737.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01437-8
W atts, T.(2020).Democracyandtheauthoritarianchallenge .Canberra:LowyInstitute.RetrievedAugust10,2024,from https://
myaccount.lowyinstitute.org/events/2020-npc-tim-watts
W axman, M. C. (2013). Regulating Resort to Force: Form and Substance of the UN Charter Regime.European Journal of
International Law, 24(1), 151–189.
Whelan, C., Hammond-Errey, M., & Villeneuve-Dubuc, M. (2024). ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: Analysis of AI
Governance Frameworks for Law Enforcement, Australian cyber security cooperative research centre. July 2024.
White House . (2025). Winning the Race. AMERICA’S AI ACTION PLAN. Retrieved May 15, 2025, fromhttps://www.
whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Americas-AI-Action-Plan.pdf
Whitlark, R. E. (2021). All Options on the Table: Leaders, Preventive War, and Nuclear Proliferation. Cornell University Press).
World Bank . (2023). GDP (current US$). The World Bank. Retrieved April 12, 2023, from https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
Zegart, A. (2022).Spies, Lies, and Algorithms: The History and Future of American Intelligence. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Zuboff, S. (2019). The age of surveillance capitalism: The fight for a human future at the new frontier of power. London: Profile
Books.
Dr Miah Hammond-Errey is the founding CEO of Strat Futures Pty Limited, host of the Technology & Security Podcast and
an adjunct Associate Professor at Deakin University. She leads the development of a platform to improve cognitive readiness
andresilienceinleaderswhomakehighstakesdecisions.DrMiahHammond-Erreyspent18yearsleadingfederalgovernment
analysis,operationalandliaisonactivitiesinAustralia,EuropeandAsia.Shehasbeenawardedmedals,citationsandawardsfor
operational service, leadership and excellence. Her book,Big Data, Emerging Technologies and Intelligence: National Security
Disrupted (2024) is based on her PhD. She developed theInformation Influence and Interference (I3) Framework, at ANU, to
counter Russian disinformation. Previously, she established and led think tank programmes on emerging technologies and
information operations. Dr Miah Hammond-Errey publishes and presents at the intersection of technology and security and
teaches postgraduate students cyber security, emerging technologies and national security.
Cite this article: Hammond-Errey, M. (2025). Architectures of AI: Tech power broking war?Cambridge Forum on AI: Law
and Governance, 1, e44, 1–21.https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10028 Published online by Cambridge University Press