--- Page 1 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance(2025), 1, e47, 1–23
doi:10.1017/cfl.2025.10041
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Computer says,“war”: AI and resort-to-force decision
making in a context of rapid change and global
uncertainty
Toni Erskine1,2
 and Steven E. Miller3
1Coral Bell School of Asia Pacific Affairs, Australian National University (ANU), Australian Capital Territory (ACT),
Canberra, Australia;2Centre for the Future of Intelligence, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK and3Belfer Center for
Science and International Affairs, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Corresponding author: Toni Erskine; Email:toni.erskine@anu.edu.au
(Received 11 December 2025; accepted 15 December 2025)
Abstract
This article prefaces our Special Issue on “AI and the Decision to Go to War.” We begin by introducing the
prospect of artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled systems increasingly infiltrating state-level decision making
on the resort to force, clarifying that our focus is onexisting technologies, and outlining the two general
ways that this can conceivably occur: through automated self-defense and AI-enabled decision-support
systems.Wethenhighlightrecent,on-goingdevelopmentsthatcreateabackdropofrapidchangeandglobal
uncertainty against which AI-enabled systems will inform such deliberations: (i) the widespread tendency
to misperceive the latest AI-enabled technologies as increasingly “human”; (ii) the changing role of “Big
Tech” in the global competition over military applications of AI; (iii) a conspicuous blind spot in current
discussions surrounding international regulation; and (iv) the emerging reality of an AI-nuclear weapons
nexus. We suggest that each factor will affect the trajectory of AI-informed war initiation and must be
addressed as scholars and policymakers determine how best to prepare for, direct, and respond to this
anticipated change. Finally, turning to the pressing legal, ethical, sociotechnical, political, and geopolitical
challenges that will accompany this transformation, we revisit four “complications” that have framed the
broader project from which this Special Issue has emerged. Within this framework, we preview the other
13 multidisciplinary research articles that make up this collection. Together, these articles explore the risks
and opportunities that will follow AI into the war-room.
Keywords: war; artificial intelligence (AI); machine learning (ML); resort to force; decision making; nuclear weapons
This is one of fourteen articles published as part of theCambridge Forum on AI: Law and GovernanceSpecial Issue,AI
and the Decision to Go to War.We would like to thank Aina Turillazzi for her superb research assistance; Jenny Davis, Sarah
Logan, and Mitja Sienknecht for incisive written comments on an earlier draft; Sean Ó hÉigeartaigh for helpful discussions
on particular points; and Tuukka Kaikkonen for his valuable assistance with references and formatting. T.E. is also grateful
for a Visiting Fellowship at the Centre for the Future of Intelligence (CFI) at the University of Cambridge during the northern
spring/summer2025,whichprovidedtheidealenvironmenttoworkonthisarticle.WithrespecttotheSpecialIssueasawhole,
we are extremely grateful to Emily Hitchman, Tuukka Kaikkonen, Hanh Nguyen, and Aina Turillazzi for editorial assistance at
different stages, to all of the contributors for their enthusiastic engagement with this project, and to the Australian Department
of Defence for the grant that has supported this project.
© The Author(s), 2026. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0), which permits re-use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided that no alterations are made and the original article is properly cited.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 2 ---
2 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
1. Introduction
Computer says, “war”? Our title is intended as a provocation. Yet, it is not the product of futuris-
tic forebodings directed at “the singularity,” a hypothetical point at which artificial intelligence (AI)
would surpass our human capacities, escape our control, and (some argue) threaten our existence.1
Rather, it aims to paint a picture that is more mundane and more immediate. Our title depicts a sce-
nario in whichexisting AI-driven systems influence state-level decisions on whether and when to
wage war. Such a scenario is soberly informed by what we maintain are impending changes in strate-
gic decision making – changes that we have robust reasons to anticipate and can already observe in
nascent form.
AI is increasingly relied upon to support, and even substitute for, human decision making in a
host of realms, including the criminal justice system, medical diagnostics, and aviation. AI-driven
systems that rely on machine-learning (ML) techniques can analyse huge quantities of data quickly,
reveal patterns of correlation in datasets that would be impossible for human actors to uncover, and
draw on these patterns to identify risks and make predictions when confronted with new data. These
capacities would seem to make such systems obvious assets when it comes to state-level decision
making on the initiation of armed conflict. After all, assessments of,inter alia, current threats, the
likely actions of adversaries, and the consequences of possible courses of action and inaction are
fundamental to such deliberations. Indeed, the diagnostic and predictive functions of ML decision
systems have reportedly already been tested in the context of anticipating adversaries’ acts of military
aggression – for example, by the national security consultancy Rhombus Power and by Silicon Valley
contractors working with US special forces (McChrystal & Roy,2023; “How America built an AI
tool to predict Taliban attacks,”2024; see Erskine & Davis,2025 for a discussion). Moreover, AI-
enabled systems currently contributeindirectly to state-level decision making on the initiation of
armed conflict through their use in intelligence collection and analysis (Deeks et al.,2019; pp. 2,
6; Logan,2024; Suchman,2023). Given the ubiquity of these technologies across multiple decision-
making domains, their potential value in contributing to deliberations over war initiation, and states’
perceived need to maintain a strategic advantage vis-à-vis their adversaries, we suggest that more
direct contributions to state-level resort-to-force decision making by existing AI-enabled systems are
imminent and inevitable.
The prospect of existing AI technologies more directly contributing to state-level decisions on
whether and when to wage war is conceivable in two general ways. AI-driven systems acting
autonomously could independently calculate and carry out courses of action that would constitute
the resort to war. Here, we might think of various manifestations of automated self-defense, where,
in specific contexts, the initiation of armed conflict could be effectively delegated to a machine. This
could occur, for example, through potentially volatile interactions between autonomous underwater
or aerial vehicles leading to unintended escalations, or as a result of automated responses to cyber
attacks (see, for example, Deeks,2024, 2025a; Deeks et al.,2019, pp. 7–10, 18–19). Alternatively, non-
autonomous AI-driven systems in the form of so-called “decision-support systems” could contribute
to deliberations over the resort to force by providing predictions or recommendations that inform
human decision making (see, for example, Davis,2024; Deeks et al.,2019, pp. 5–7, 10–11; Erskine,
2024b). In these latter cases, although some human actors in the decision-making chain might be
1On the hypothetical achievement of “artificial general intelligence” (AGI) (which would match or surpasses human capac-
ities on most cognitive tasks) or “super intelligence” (which would far exceed the cognitive capacities of even the brightest
human actors) as an existential risk, see for example Bostrom (2014, pp. 115–26). Perhaps most famously, Stephen Hawking
declared that “[t]he development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race” (Cellan-Jones,2014).
Such speculation has become increasingly common alongside the advent and rapid development of language-generative mod-
els such as ChatGPT. See, for example, Center for AI Safety (2023), Kleinman (2023), Metz (2023), Ó Héigeartaigh (2025b),
and Roose (2023). For exemplar counter-perspectives that contest and complicate such claims, see Kasirzadeh and Gyevnar
(2025) and Vallor (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 3 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 3
displaced, human decision makers would remain the final arbiters of whether and when to resort to
force.
By focusing on these possibilities, this Special Issue – like the earlier collection (Erskine & Miller,
2024b) upon which it builds and the broader research project from which both have emerged –
embodies a significant shift in focus when it comes to analysing military applications of AI. Amongst
both scholars and policy makers, there is a prevailing preoccupation with AI-driven systems used
in the conduct of war: weapons that possess various degrees of autonomy, including, most promi-
nently, the emerging reality of “lethal autonomous weapons systems” (LAWS); and decision-support
systems that rely on big data analytics and machine learning to recommend targets, such as those
that have gained particular notoriety through their use by Israel in the war in Gaza (see, for exam-
ple, Davies, McKernan & Sabbagh,2023; Yuval,2024). These are important objects of study. Yet, our
attention should also encompass the relatively neglected prospect of AI-driven systems that would
variously determine or inform theresort to war.2 As we have described previously, the shift in focus
that we are advocating takes us “from AI on thebattlefield to AI in thewar-room”(Erskine & Miller,
2024a, p. 138). Rather than focusing on tactical decisions surrounding selecting and engaging targets
in armed conflict, we explore the necessarily prior stage of state-level, strategic deliberation over the
very initiation of war and military interventions. As such, we move fromjus in belloto jus ad bellum
considerationsinthelanguageofthejustwartradition,andfromactionsadjudicatedbyinternational
humanitarian law to actions constrained and condoned by the United Nations (UN) Charter’s (1945)
prohibition on the resort to force and its explicit exceptions.
As we acknowledge and anticipate this emerging application of AI in the military domain, there is
an urgent need to identify the legal, ethical, sociotechnical, political, and geopolitical challenges that
will accompany it – and determine how best to respond to them. This is the task of the 13 research
articles that follow. Our aim here is to introduce this collection by briefly highlighting four recent
developmentsthatwesuggestaredirectlyrelevanttohowAI-enabledsystemswillinfiltrateandinflu-
enceresort-to-forcedecisionmaking.Specifically,weaddressthefollowing:thewidespreadtendency
to misperceive the latest AI-enabled technologies as increasingly “human”; the changing role of “Big
Tech” in the global competition over military applications of AI; a conspicuous blind spot in cur-
rent discussions surrounding international regulation; and the emerging AI-nuclear weapons nexus.
AI-driven systems will increasingly inform state-level decisions on whether and when to wage war.
Together, these four factors represent a backdrop of rapid change and profound global uncertainty
thatwillaffectthetrajectoryofthisphenomenon.Eachmustbeaddressedasscholarsandpolicymak-
ers determine how best to prepare for, direct, and respond to the prospect of AI-informed decisions
on the initiation of armed conflict.
2. The illusion of increasingly “human” AI
While the phenomenon of AI infiltrating resort-to-force decision making promises far-reaching
geopolitical effects, when it comes to recent transformations that will significantly influence the
nature of this impact, it is necessary to zoom in on a subtle shift at the individual human level of
analysis. The first point of change and upheaval that we will address is simply how human actors have
come to perceive and interact with rapidly evolving and seemingly ubiquitous AI-driven systems.
By “AI” we mean, simply, the capacity of machines to imitate aspects of intelligent human
behaviour – noting that this general label is also often used for the wide range of technologies that
display this capability. Yet, the significance of this defining feature ofimitationrisks being overlooked
as human users stand in awe of emerging AI-driven technologies, particularly those inferential mod-
els that rely on ML techniques. In November 2022, “ChatGPT” (short for “generative pre-trained
2Pioneering exceptions to this general neglect are Deeks et al. (2019), Horowitz & Lin-Greenberg (2022), and Wong et al.
(2020).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 4 ---
4 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
transformer”) was launched by OpenAI.3 This was followed by Meta’s “Llama,” Anthropic’s “Claude,”
and Google’s “Gemini,” all launched in 2023, with increasingly sophisticated iterations of each family
of models appearing in rapid succession. The ability of these large language models (LLMs) to pass
the so-called “Turing test” (75 years after it was first proposed) by convincingly mimicking human
expression has been startling (Jones & Bergen,2025).4 Yet, it is the perception – ormisperception–
of what this means that has the potential to be profoundly consequential.
UserstendtoembraceaconceptionofthesegenerativeAImodelsbecomingincreasingly“human”
– a conception reflected, in its most enthusiastic form, in unfounded claims that we have already
achieved, or are on the brink of achieving, artificial general intelligence (AGI). Yet, while LLMs may
appear to deliberate and exercise judgment in response to our questions and prompts, understand
what they are conveying, and even engage in critical self-reflection, they possess none of these capac-
ities. A number of problems follow from this misalignment. First, it can lead to a misunderstanding
about how these systems function. For example, there is a common misperception that LLMs “make
mistakes” when they generate false information and that they sometimes “make things up” (or “hal-
lucinate”). Both accounts are misguided. These systems are not designed to seek the truth, but rather
toproduceprobabilistic outputs.Theyfunctionbystatisticalinference,simplypredictingwhichsym-
bol is likely to follow in a series. When these outputs contain false information, the models are not
making a mistake but, rather, doing exactly what they were designed to do. Moreover, it is not the
case that theysometimes make things up; theyalways make things up. Sometimes this happens to
correspond with reality.
A second problem, which follows on from the first, is that it is easy to overlook the limits of such
systems.PeoplemayreasonablyvaluethecomputationalabilitiesofAI-drivensystemsthatdoindeed
surpass those of human actors, but will run into difficulty if they imagine these to be accompanied by
certainhumancapacities.Inotherwords,expectingsuchsystemstobeabletoseektruthandcarefully
reflectonrecommendationsleavesusersunpreparedforthesystem’sinabilitytodoso.Moreover,false
confidence in the capacities that these systems merely mimic, and an accompanying lack of attention
to their limitations, will only exacerbate existing deference to their outputs – a deference that already
results from susceptibility to “automation bias,” or the human tendency to trust, accept, and follow
computer-generated outputs.5 Finally, such misperceptions of the capacities of AI-driven systems
might lead to mistaken (perhaps wishful) attributions of an agency that would ostensibly allow them
to bear responsibility for particular actions and outcomes, thereby letting their users – including
political and military leaders charged with weighty decisions of whether and when to wage war – off
the moral hook (Cummings,2006, p. 28; Erskine,2024a, pp. 552–54; Erskine2024b, pp. 180–82).
When it comes to AI-driven technologies and resort-to-force decision making, the illusion of
increasingly “human” AI could have grave geopolitical repercussions if it means that AI-generated
outputs are perceived as the product of truth-seeking, reasoned, and even ethically deliberated
judgments. Decision makers might thereby be more willing to either defer to the predictions and
recommendations of these systems (in the context of AI-enabled decision-support systems) or del-
egate decision making and action to them (in the case of automated defense systems). The danger,
we suggest, is not the appearance of “emergent properties” in AI systems that would see them escape
human control and threaten our collective existence, but, rather,simulatedcapacities that may entice
those in power to cede responsibility for important decisions and actions.
3See Hao (2025, 256-61) for an account of ChatGPT’s meteoric launch.
4The “Turing test” is the label commonly given to Alan Turing’s (1950, 433–4) “imitation game,” originally proposed as
a proxy for answering the question “Can machines think?” The experiment places both a computer and a human actor in
written dialogue with a human adjudicator, who is tasked with determining which is which based on responses to questions.
Amachinepassesthis“Turingtest”iftheadjudicatorisunabletoreliablydistinguishitfromthegenuinelyhumaninterlocutor.
5On “automation bias” see: Cummings (2006; 2015); Mosier and Manzey (2019); Skitka, Mosier and Burdick (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 5 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 5
This dangerous illusion and resulting temptation to abdicate responsibility for crucial decisions
and actions are exacerbated in the context of our second point of change and upheaval: the perceived
geopolitical “race” to develop and employ these AI-enabled systems for military advantage.
3. The accelerating, militarized “race” of the tech leviathans
Accounts of a global AI “race” abound. Descriptions are offered, for example, of an “AI arms race”
(Haner & Garcia,2019; Knight,2023; Simonite,2017; United Nations,2024), an “AI military race”
(Garcia, 2023), a “geopolitical innovation race” surrounding AI research and development (Schmid
etal., 2025),anda“technologyracetoadoptAI”(Scharre, 2021,p.122).Thesearevariouslyconceived
with reference to geopolitical competition over military applications of AI, often with a specific focus
on LAWS, or in relation to AI innovation more generally, whereby states – most prominently the
United States and China – compete for technological leadership with the aim of achieving not only
military but also economic and political superiority. Indeed, laments of an American race lost, or
forfeited, heralded the release of a new chatbot in January 2025 by the Chinese start-up, DeepSeek
(Belanger, 2025, pp. 3–4). Despite debates over labels and appropriate analogies, there is general
agreement that the global competition over AI innovation is imbued with a sense of urgency.
We are concerned here with one aspect of this perceived race: the emerging role of powerful tech
companies in what is an increasingly militarized competition. This move has been accompanied by
thesecorporationsabandoninghithertoself-imposedethicalguidelines,alongwithboldjustifications
for this reversal. Our second snapshot of change brings us back precisely to those LLMs addressed in
the previous section and, we suggest, bolsters our assessment of the inevitable and imminent use of
such AI-enabled systems in state-level decision making on the resort to force.
Big Tech is not merely part of a global competition in AI innovation. With striking changes to
their own policies and purported values, American tech companies are now increasingly contribut-
ing to the specificallymilitary dimension of this competition – a move that Assaad (2025) has aptly
described as the “militarization of commercial AI.” In late 2024, Anthropic, Meta, and OpenAI each
enteredagreementsthatmaketheirAImodelsavailabletoUSgovernmentagenciesthroughdefense-
industry partners and explicitly framed these deployments as serving defense and national security
(Assaad, 2024, 2025; Wiggers, 2024). In November 2024, Anthropic partnered with the tech data
analytics firm Palantir Technologies, alongside cloud-infrastructure provider Amazon Web Services
(AWS), to make its Claude AI models available to US defense and intelligence agencies (Palantir,
2024; see also Rosenberg,2024). Palantir (2024) promised that the result would be “new generative
AI capabilities” that would “dramatically improve intelligence analyses and enable officials in their
decision-making processes.”
The same month, Meta announced that it would make its open-source Llama AI models avail-
able to US defense and national security agencies through partnerships with defense and technology
companies,includingtheprivateAIcompanyScaleAI(Clegg, 2024;seealsoOutpost, 2024;Sadashiv,
2024). As part of this partnership, Scale AI has introduced “Defence Llama,” an LLM built on Meta’s
Llama 3, which Scale AI has promoted as being “fine-tuned to support American national secu-
rity missions” by enabling “military operators, strategic planners, and decision-makers” to “apply the
power of generative AI to their unique use cases, such as planning military or intelligence operations
and understanding adversary vulnerabilities” (The Scale Team,2024).
In December 2024, OpenAI, creator of ChatGPT, entered a “strategic partnership” with defense
technology startup Anduril Industries “to develop and responsibly deploy advanced artificial intel-
ligence (AI) solutions for national security missions,” with the specific aim to “address urgent
Air Defence capability gaps across the world” and “enable military and intelligence operators to
make faster, more accurate decisions in high-pressure situations” (Anduril,2024; see also Assaad,
2024; Ferran,2024; Shanklin,2024).6 Notably, these national-security deployments of generative AI
6The OpenAI–Anduril partnership explicitly targets the integration of OpenAI’s frontier models into Anduril’s existing
defence platforms, particularly for air and missile defence and broader command-and-control functions (Anduril,2024).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 6 ---
6 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
models – with explicit promises of high-level decision making, strategic planning, and command-
and-control functions7 – map directly on to the types of tools and applications required for the
AI-enabledresort-to-forcedecisionmaking(inbothitsautomatedself-defenseanddecision-support
system variations) that we have been arguing is on the horizon (Erskine & Miller,2024a, pp. 138–39;
Erskine, 2024b, pp. 175–78).8
These public declarations by American tech corporations to support military endeavours and act
in the service of defense and national security are also notable because they represent a consider-
able and consequential shift in policy and purpose. Indeed, in the case of Meta, this commitment
effectively circumvented its own guidelines (subsequently reiterated in relation to Llama 4) prohibit-
ing the use of its Llama model “to engage in, promote, incite, facilitate, or assist in the planning or
development of” activities related to “military, warfare, nuclear industries or applications” (Meta,
2025; see also Assaad,2024).9 Not only has Meta allowed derivative models to be regulated under
its partners’ more permissive policies, but it has effectively enabled military-use exceptions through
partner licensing and model fine-tuning, even while retaining formal prohibitions in its public policy
language (Moorhead,2024).
OpenAI and Google have made comparable moves, although by abandoning rather than circum-
venting their respective codes. In January 2024, OpenAI adjusted its position on allowing its models
to be used for military applications. While it retained its prohibition against employing its models for
the development or use of weapons systems, OpenAI nevertheless discarded its prohibition against
contributing to other “military and warfare” applications (Frenkel,2025; Shanklin,2024). Likewise,
inFebruary2025,GoogleannouncedafundamentalchangetoitsAIprinciples(Manyika&Hassabis,
2025; see also Assaad,2025; Bacciarelli,2025). As originally published in 2018, these principles had
included commitments “not to design or deploy AI” in a number of application areas, including:
“[t]echnologies that cause or are likely to cause overall harm,” “[w]eapons and other technologies
whose principal purpose or implementation is to directly facilitate injury to people,” and “[t]ech-
nologies that gather or use information for surveillance violating internationally accepted norms”
(Pichai, 2018). Surprisingly, all of these prohibitions were removed in its revised principles (Assaad,
2025; Bacciarelli, 2025; Google, 2025). Within an industry where, until recently, forswearing con-
tributions to military endeavours had been the norm, this seismic cultural shift was perhaps most
vividly displayed in June 2025 when four prominent Silicon Valley executives were commissioned as
lieutenant colonels in the US Army (Desmarais,2025; Levy,2025).10
HowtheAmericantechindustryhasdefendeditsfundamentalrealignmentwithnationalsecurity
priorities is significant, not least because these actors overwhelmingly determine global AI capacity
and direction. Rather than casting aside ethical commitments as such, they have espoused an alter-
native moral compass. We can reasonably assume that these tech corporations have followed the
7While the systems promised in these announcements will operate primarily as decision-support rather than fully
automated self-defence agents, their anticipated integration into command-and-control pipelines establishes the technical
conditions under which the transition from decision-support systems to automated escalation pathways becomes feasible.
8Indeed,asthisarticlegoestopress,theUSDepartmentofWar( 2025)hasannouncedthelaunchofGoogleCloud’s“Gemini
for Government,” to be housed on the Department’s new AI platform, GenAI.mil. Describing this development as “leveraging
generative AI capabilities to create a more efficient and battle-ready enterprise,” the Department claims that “[t]he release of
GenAI.mil is an indispensable strategic imperative for our fighting force, further establishing the United States as the global
leader in AI” (US Department of War,2025).
9Among the prohibited uses, according to the “acceptable use policy” for Llama 4 (launched in April 2025), are employing
or allowing others to employ Llama 4 to “[e]ngage in, promote, incite, facilitate, or assist in the planning or development of
activities that present a risk of death or bodily harm to individuals, including use of Llama 4 related to… [m]ilitary, warfare,
nuclear industries or applications…” (Meta,2025).
10ThisnewU.S.ArmyReserveunitiscalled“Detachment201:theExecutiveInnovationCorps.”Theexecutivesare:Andrew
Bosworth, Meta’s Chief Technology Officer; Kevin Weil, OpenAI’s Head of Product, Bob McGrew, Former OpenAI Head of
Research, who is now advising the AI Company Thinking Machines Lab, and Shyam Sankar, Palantir’s Chief Technology
Officer. See Desmarais (2025); Levy (2025).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 7 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 7
promise of financial gain by declaring a commitment to support states such as the United States in
achieving an AI advantage in the military realm. However, they justify this move and corresponding
reversal of policy in often overtly moral language through impassioned appeals to: the urgency of
winning the increasingly militarized AI “race” at what they portray as a moment of extreme geopolit-
ical risk; duties to protect national security and preserve the “shared values” of Western democracies;
and even a commitment to good over evil.
InofferinganaccountofwhyGooglejettisoneditsAIprinciples,Googlerepresentativesexplained
that “[t]here is a global competition taking place for AI leadership within an increasingly complex
geopolitical landscape” and expressed an imperative that “companies, governments, and organiza-
tions…that share core values” cooperate to create AI that “protects people, promotes global growth,
and supports national security” (Manyika & Hassabis,2025). According to a Meta spokesperson,
“[r]esponsible uses of open source AI models promote global security and help establish the U.S. in
the global race for AI leadership” (Clegg,2024). He added that “[w]e believe it is in both America and
the wider democratic world’s interest for American open-source models to excel and succeed over
models from China and elsewhere” (Clegg,2024).11 In a similar vein, in the context of announcing
its partnership with OpenAI, Anduril Industries (Anduril,2024) claimed that:
The accelerating race between the United States and China to lead the world in advancing AI
makesthisapivotalmoment.IftheUnitedStatescedesground,werisklosingthetechnological
edge that has underpinned our national security for decades. The decisions made now will
determinewhethertheUnitedStatesremainsaleaderinthe21 st centuryorrisksbeingoutpaced
by adversaries who don’t share our commitment to freedom and democracy and would use AI
to threaten other countries.
Continuing this theme of supreme geopolitical emergency, the CEO of Palantir Industries (with
which Anthropic recently partnered), Alex Karp, described the race to develop AI technologies, inl-
cudingtoadvanceLLMs,as“ourOppenheimermoment”(Karp, 2023).Thishistoricalreferencetothe
race to develop the first nuclear weapons underscores how industry leaders present current geopolit-
ical stakes as allowing, even requiring, what would otherwise be considered morally unacceptable (Ó
Héigeartaigh,2025a, p. 11). Even more starkly, the chief technology officer of Palantir, Shyam Sankar,
reflected in an interview in October 2025 that “the moral view we have, which is why we started the
company, [is] that the West is a force for good…There is evil in the world and that evil is not us”
(Douthat,2025). These positions embraced by prominent American tech companies – by which they
not only espouse moral imperatives to grant themselves permission to dispatch their data-driven
models for military endeavours, but also support narratives of an accelerating, militarized AI race in
order to establish the urgency of doing so – are particularly significant for the strategic applications
of AI-driven technologies in which we are interested.
These tech leviathans are not just joining the perceived geopolitical race over militarized AI inno-
vation. They are actively contributing to its creation. And they have strong incentives for doing so
that are commercial rather than security-focused. Appeals to national security and the notion of a
civilizational life-or-death geopolitical race serve the interests of these corporations when faced with
regulations that would constrain their growth, such as those related to intellectual property protec-
tions, for example (Berger,2025, p. 6). Both OpenAI and Google are lobbying the US government to
designate AI training on copyrighted data as “fair use,” arguing that this access is crucial for main-
taining the United State’s competitive edge in the global AI arena (Berger,2025). Indeed, invoking
risks to national security, OpenAI has declared that “the race for AI is effectively over” if US com-
panies are denied such access while “the PRC’s developers have unfettered access to data” (Belanger,
11Ó hÉigeartaigh’s (2025a, p. 18) observes that although Western policy and industry leaders increasingly frame AI devel-
opment through such civilisational and geopolitical binaries, thereby rhetorically constructing this accelerating “race” in a way
that becomes self-fulfilling, Chinese public discourse rarely uses similar framings.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 8 ---
8 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
2025). While Big Tech companies make bold appeals to national and civilizational survival in the
context of this lobbying, they also frequently fund policy discourse that emphasises, and perpetuates,
national-security fears and geopolitical rivalry (Ó Héigeartaigh,2025a).
Notably, new pathways for commercial AI development to directly serve military objectives cre-
ate dependencies between defense capabilities and private sector AI advancement. This convergence
raises difficult questions about the boundaries between commercial and military AI development,
particularly as these companies’ AI models become integral to both civilian and defense applica-
tions.12 Such dependencies begin to challenge the state’s ostensible monopoly on the legitimate use
of force in new and complex ways. After all, these tech corporations create the conditions under
which the state’s military capabilities are increasingly mediated through, and reliant upon, private-
sector systems.13 These dependencies also add credence to what we have argued is the imminent
and inevitable use of AI-enabled systems in resort-to-force decision making. We have already made
this case based both on the ubiquity of such systems across other realms of human decision making
and states’ perceived need to match adversaries’ capabilities. This development represents yet another
reason to conclude that AI will increasingly and directly infiltrate resort-to-force decision making.
Simply, moving towards algorithm-informed deliberations over whether and when to wage war has
become part of a Big Tech business model. Arguably, so has war itself.
This evolving military role of the tech leviathans, along with the incentives and allowances that it
creates for them to champion unfettered innovation, leads us directly to questions of international
regulation.Ourthirdsnapshotof(somewhatslower)changeaimstocaptureaconspicuousregulatory
blind spot and emerging awareness of the need to consider constraints on military applications of AI
beyond the battlefield.
4. An international regulatory blind spot
WhenitcomestomilitaryapplicationsofAIgenerally,attemptsatinternationalregulationarealready
curtailed by states’ unwillingness to accept limits that could result in strategic disadvantage by con-
straining what they are able to develop and deploy. This is part of the geopolitical competition just
addressed. Yet,whenweturn specifically totheinfiltrationofAI-enabled systemsintoresort-to-force
decision making, there is also another problem in the form of aregulatory blind spot.Simply, while
acknowledging that the process of achieving consensus on international norms governing military
applications of AI is bound to be fraught with difficulties, we note that constraints on the use of
AI-driven systems for state-level resort-to-force decision making have rarely even made it onto the
negotiating table.14 This is despite the fact that we have every reason to assume that widely acknowl-
edged risks that accompany the use of these technologies in theconduct of war – such as deference to
machine-generated outputs stifling and ultimately eroding human judgment, for example – will also
appear if and when they are used for deliberation over itsinitiation, and with the potential for even
greater resulting harm.
Attempts at the international regulation of military applications of AI tend to be directed towards
systems that are used on the battlefield, in the conduct of war, rather than those that may infiltrate
the war-room and otherwise contribute to crucial stages of decision making and action that would
lead to the initiation of organised violence. Examples of this restricted focus can be found in promi-
nent bodies and resolutions that address military applications of AI – and have achieved important
areasofconsensus(albeitonprinciplesthatarelegallynonbindingandgenerallytheleastcontentious
12We are grateful to Aina Turillazzi for raising this point.
13For a powerful treatment of these AI technology companies as “new national security actors” upon which state govern-
ments could, in the near future, become dependent for the operation of their national infrastructures, see Hammond-Errey
(2025).
14The rare case where the regulation of AI-enabled systems for resort-to-force decision making is at least broached is with
respect to autonomous systems and nuclear weapons, as we address in the following section.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 9 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 9
of those proposed) – exclusively with respect to AI-enabled weapons. These include the Group of
GovernmentExpertsonEmergingTechnologiesintheAreaofLethalAutonomousWeaponsSystems
(LAWS GGE) and the UN General Assembly Resolution 78/241 on Lethal Autonomous Weapons
(UN CCW,2019; United Nations, General Assembly,2023). Moreover, the consensus reached fol-
lowing the first “Responsible AI in the Military Domain” (REAIM) Summit, a multistakeholder
dialogue that brought together representatives from governments, industry, academia, and civil soci-
ety organizations, held in The Hague in February 2023, was similarly restricted in scope. The 2023
REAIM Summit resulted in the US-led “Political Declaration on the Responsible Military Use of
Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy,” which was signed by 51 countries in November of the same
year (Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and Deterrence,2023). In the Declaration, “military AI
capabilities” are discussed exhaustively in the guise of “weapons systems,” with the prescription that
states “take appropriate steps, such as legal reviews, to ensure that their military AI capabilities will
be used consistent with their respective obligations under international law” qualified as “interna-
tional humanitarian law,” which governs theconduct of war (Bureau of Arms Control, Verification,
and Deterrence,2023).15
This regulatory blind spot is due to multiple factors. To begin, as we have already suggested, the
focus on AI-enabled systems in war has been directed specifically towards those that contribute to its
conduct rather than its initiation. The resulting neglect affects both categories of AI-enabled systems
that we have suggested could inform the resort to force: automated defense systems and AI-enabled
decision-support systems. Yet, such neglect is compounded when it comes to the latter category. This
is because ML-driven strategic decision-support systems that would draw on the generative AI mod-
els discussed above are not readily perceived as threats that warrant regulation – a point exacerbated
by the dual-use nature of these systems, which can be used for both strategic decision making and
civilian applications.16 Unlike both LAWS and AI-enabled decision-support systems used for target-
ing in the conduct of war, their use in state-level strategic and political decision making is not seen
to be directly implicated in the “kill chain” – even though they could help create the conditions that
would make myriad “kill chains” possible. In short, the harm to be mitigated through regulation
is seen to accompany weapons deployment rather than upstream decision logic. Simply, AI-driven
decision-support systems that would metaphorically enter the war-room do not fit the mould of what
is to be regulated. In addition to this innocuous guise, their persistent invisibility when it comes to
efforts at regulation is further heightened by the practical reality of the cloistered, necessarily secre-
tive nature of the national security deliberations for which they would be used17 – and, of course, by
states’ likely reticence to consider restrictions that affect their internal decision making and sovereign
war-making prerogative.
Finally, our proposal that AI-driven systems will increasingly infiltrate resort-to-force decision
making remains speculative. This is speculation that we have argued is informed by significant
changes in a host of other realms; rests on technologies that we have now; and points to near-future
(indeed nascent) developments that are currently being ushered into existence (Erskine & Miller,
2024a, p. 135). Nevertheless, the speculative nature of these anticipated developments may mean that
they are easily overlooked due to a “failure of imagination” in terms of what is seen to be possible,
where prospective risks lie, and what should therefore be regulated.18
15Notably, the “REAIM Call to Action” issued by the Government of the Netherlands (2023) ahead of the 2023 Summit
acknowledges that “[m]ilitaries are increasing their use of AI across a range of applications and contexts.” Nevertheless, these
applications and contexts are not specified, nor do they feature in the “Political Declaration” that followed from the Summit.
16For complementary points on AI-driven decision-support systems used in resort-to-force decision making being less
visible than LAWS, and therefore removed from public debate, as well as being less susceptible to scrutiny at the time of their
development due to the cover of their dual-use technology, see Sienknecht (2025, pp. 9–10).
17Ashley Deeks’ notion of the “double black box” is directly relevant here. See Deeks (2025b).
18We owe the phrase “failure of imagination” in this context to discussions with Aina Turillazzi.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 10 ---
10 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
Nevertheless, since the publication of our previous collection calling for greater attention to the
influence of AI on deliberations over the resort to force (Erskine & Miller,2024b), there have been
promising gestures towards the need to also consider, and possibly curtail, the impact of military
applications of AI beyond the battlefield. The second REAIM Summit, convened on 9–10 September
2024, in Seoul, Republic of Korea, produced a “Blueprint for Action,” officially endorsed as the out-
come document of the Summit. Although nonbinding and largely aspirational, it was supported by
61 states, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and Japan (Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Republic of Korea,2024). This “Blueprint for Action” was described by the organisers of the
Summit as laying out “a roadmap for establishing norms of AI in the military domain” (REAIM,
2024).ThereisevidencethatthenormsthatitenvisionsarenotlimitedtothepreviousSummit’sfocus
onLAWSandotherAI-drivensystemsdeployedintheconductofwar.TheBlueprintforActionopens
with an acknowledgement that the aspects of military affairs that AI has the potential to transform
include not only military operations but also “command and control, intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR) activities, training, information management and logistical support” (Ministry
ofForeignAffairs,RepublicofKorea, 2024).Moreover,initsnumberedrecommendations,itincludes
amongst risks that accompany AI applications in the military domain “risks of arms race, miscalcu-
lation, escalation and lowering threshold of conflict” (3), and mentions applicable international law
beyond IHL, including the UN Charter (7) (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea,2024)
– all indications of an emerging acknowledgement of the potential role of AI-driven decision sys-
tems in the initiation of war. Furthermore, the Blueprint for Action recognises the role of AI in cyber
operations (4) and warns that “it is especially crucial to maintain human control and involvement
for all actions critical to informing and executing sovereign decisions concerning nuclear weapons
employment” (5) (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea,2024). In sum, despite its enduring
focus on AI-enabled weapons and decision-support systems used specifically for combat operations,
on each of these points, the Blueprint for Action inches into the territory of AI-enabled systems that
could either inform or temporarily displace human decision making on the resort to force.
The UN General Assembly has also recently signalled a shift in its attention beyond LAWS. In
December 2024, in Resolution 79/239 adopted by the UN General Assembly, the UN Secretary-
Generalwasaskedtoseektheviewsof“MemberStates…observerStates…internationalandregional
organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross, civil society, the scientific commu-
nity and industry” on the “opportunities and challenges posed to international peace and security
by the application of artificial intelligence in the military domain,with specific focus on areas other
than lethal autonomous weapons systems”(United Nations, General Assembly,2024).19 A substantive
report by the UN Secretary-General, which summarises submitted views and catalogues “existing
and emerging normative proposals” pursuant to resolution 79/239, followed in June 2025 (United
Nations, General Assembly,2025). This emerging shift in focus is significant – even if it is only in its
early stages – and has been both prompted and foreshadowed by the articles in this special issue.20
Attempts at international regulation of military applications of AI must overcome persistent blind
spots and consider the influence of both autonomous and non-autonomous AI-enabled systems on
the resort to force. When it comes specifically to AI-enabled decision-support systems that become
embeddedupstreaminthreatperceptionandstrategicassessment,regulationmustaddressthecogni-
tivepipelinethroughwhichwardecisionsareshaped.Howthisisdone,whatprinciplesofrestraintare
required,andwhoorwhatshouldberegulated–BigTechasanemerging agent of warisachallenging
and crucial candidate to consider – are questions that require urgent attention.
19Emphasis added. A policy report with recommendations arising from the research presented in this Special Issue was
submittedinresponsetothiscallandisavailableinfullintheUNOfficeforDisarmamentAffairsDocumentsLibrary(Erskine
et al.,2025a).
20The Secretary General’s report includes a summary of the policy recommendations distilled from the research presented
in this Special Issue on the prospective risks and opportunities of AI-enabled systems used for resort-to-force decision making
(United Nations, General Assembly,2025, pp. 133–139).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 11 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 11
Notably, there is one area where AI’s potential influence on resort-to-force decision making
has already produced some consensus on the need to cooperate and impose constraints: at the
intersection of AI and nuclear weapons, the subject of our final snapshot of consequential change.
5. The AI – nuclear weapons nexus
In response to the wave of attention that has been devoted to the feared existential threat posed by
future generations of AI, we have maintained the importance of uncovering and attempting to miti-
gate the immediate risks that accompany already-existing AI-driven technologies. Our concern has
been that a preoccupation with the prospect of AGI as an existential threat occludes dangers with
which we are already confronted (Erskine,2024b, p. 176). Nevertheless, in one important domain,
related specifically to resort-to-force decision making, ourcurrent iterations of AI do threaten to
contribute to an existential threat – that is, the existential threat posed by nuclear weapons.
From the dawn of the nuclear age, it has been recognized that nuclear weapons can inflict massive,
catastrophic harm, that they represent what Bertrand Russell and Albert Einstein, in a famous 1955
manifesto, identified as a species-threatening technology. “We are speaking on this occasion,” Russell
and Einstein wrote in one of the most dramatic appeals of the nuclear age (and in cosmopolitan
language starkly at odds with Big Tech’s more recent and particularistic calls to action in the face of
existential peril), “not as members of this or that nation, continent, or creed, but as human beings,
members of the species Man, whose continued existence is in doubt.”21 How will AI interact with this
technology that possesses such enormous destructive potential, that in the worst case is capable of
destroyingmoderncivilization?Becausethestakesaresohighandtherisksaresorealandimmediate,
this AI-nuclear weapons nexuslooms particularly large in thinking about the implications of AI and
resort-to-force decision making.
AI could figure in decisions about whether to use nuclear weapons in three ways: It could be allo-
cated decision-making discretion; it could serve as an input, or eventhe input, in human decision
making; and it could influence decisions as a consequence of its impact on the nuclear balance. There
is already much debate about the cumulative effect of AI on the nuclear order, with some commenta-
tors arguing that it can have useful, benign, or stabilizing consequences.22 However, it is the risks and
potentialadverseimpactsthatcompellinglycommandattentionduetotherealpossibilityoftrulydis-
astrousoutcomes.Asonerecentanalysisurges,“itisessentialforpolicymakerstobeawareoftherisks
posed by the AI-nuclear nexus” (Stokes et al.,2025, p. 1). Failure to address those risks, it concludes,
“could leave the country and the world dangerously exposed to risks and ill-prepared to seize any
opportunities arising from the increasingly salient AI-nuclear nexus” (Stokes et al.,2025, p. 1). Depp
and Scharre (2024) convey the concern in stark terms: “Improperly used, AI in nuclear operations
could have world-ending effects.”
5.1. Allocating nuclear decision-making discretion to AI
OnepossiblenuclearapplicationofAIseemstohavediedarapiddeath.Thereappearstobeverylittle
inclination anywhere to fully automate nuclear-use decision making, to turn an extraordinarily con-
sequential decision over to AI – though in principle this could bolster deterrence by increasing the
likelihoodandeffectivenessofretaliation.AsTomNichols( 2025a)hasexplained,“Somedefenseana-
lysts wonder if AI – which reacts faster and more dispassionately to information than human beings
– could alleviate some of the burden of nuclear decision making. This is a spectacularly dangerous
idea.” Relevant decision makers around the world have responded to this “spectacularly dangerous
idea” by rejecting it.
21The text of the Manifesto and the story of its creation and launch can be found in Butcher (2005).
22AnoptimisticviewcanbefoundinPuwal( 2024).ThemoreworriedendofthespectrumcanbefoundinO’Hanlon( 2025)
and Vega and Johns (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 12 ---
12 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
In recent years, attention to the AI-nuclear weapons nexus has produced a profusion of assertions
and assurances from many countries and in various settings that nuclear decision making should
and will remain in human hands. The world seems to have converged on the notion that there should
alwaysbea “human in the loop”inthiscontext,meaningsimplythathumanactorsmustbeactivepar-
ticipants in AI-assisted decisions and outcomes and must be the ones to instigate an action; no action
is to be taken without human intervention.23 In its 2022 Nuclear Posture Review and subsequent offi-
cial documents, for example, the United States has repeatedly made this pledge. In its recent update
of nuclear planning guidance, the US Department of Defense (2024, p. 4) reiterates, “In all cases, the
United States will maintain a human ‘in the loop’ for all actions critical to informing and execut-
ing decisions by the President to initiate and terminate nuclear weapons employment.”24 The issue
has figured in high-level diplomacy. A notable instance is the Sino-American meeting in November
2024, at which President Biden and President Xi agreed that nuclear use decisions should remain in
humancontrol.25 Thisissuehassimilarlyfiguredinmultilateraldiplomacy.AttheReviewConference
of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) in 2022, France, the United Kingdom, and the United
States submitted a document on “Principles and Responsible Practices for Nuclear Weapon States,”
which includes a pledge by their governments to “maintain human control” of nuclear decision mak-
ing (France, United Kingdom & United States, 2022, para. 5.vii). Moreover, as already noted, the
2024 Blueprint for Action, which emerged from the second REAIM Summit, categorically states that
“human control and involvement” is essential forall actions that are “critical to informing and exe-
cuting sovereign decisions concerning nuclear weapons employment” (Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Republic of Korea,2024). In short, although AI offers the potential for automating at least some mili-
tarydecisionmakingandcreating(partiallyorfully)autonomousmilitarycapabilities,whenitcomes
tothenuclearrealm,thereappearstobeinternationalconsensusthathumandiscretionisimperative.
An algorithm should not make decisions that could lead to Armageddon.
5.2. Keeping humans in the loop
The expectation is, then, that there will be a human in the loop when nuclear use decisions are made.
The allocation of decision-making discretion to AI is thus avoided – precluding the long-imagined
and long-feared nightmare ofmachine-drivenemployment ofnuclear weapons(Nichols,2025b). But
as AI is integrated into intelligence analysis and decision-support systems, it is likely increasingly to
be a significant input into the calculus of top decision makers. Despite the comforting “human-in-
the-loop” assurance that decision-making authority will remain with human actors, individuals at
the apex of power, making momentous decisions, will be utilizing – perhaps heavily relying upon
– data, conclusions, and recommendations generated by AI. Ensuring that humans are in the loop,
therefore, is not enough. We need also to ask: What are the implications of AI-enabled systems for
nuclear decision makingeven with humans in the loop?
The answer requires that fundamental questions be addressed. In the era of Putin and Trump, for
example, it seems obvious that it matters which humans are in the loop.26 But what does it mean to
have a human in the loop? Intelligence operations or command-and-control arrangements that are
heavily dependent on AI may have a human making decisions at the top, but AI-generated outputs
maybecomethedominantcontributingfactorsindeliberationsovertheuseofnuclearweapons.Will
the leader understand this loop and their role in it? There are strong claims in the literature that this is
23This is distinct from the related concepts of “human-on-the-loop,” which entails human oversight and override provisions
so that an AI-enabled system can calculate and carry out a course of action, with humans auditing this behaviour and able to
intervene(andabortanaction),and“ human-out-of-the-loop,”wherebytheAI-enabledsystemworkscompletelyautonomously
after setup, without human interference or oversight.
24ThisdocumentreproducesexactlythedeclarationinUSDepartmentofDefense( 2022,p.13) 2022NuclearPostureReview .
25An example of the extensive coverage of this development is Egan and Kine (2024).
26For account of the importance of having “experts in the loop,” see Davis (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 13 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 13
not possible. “No single human,” write Leins and Kaspersen (2021), “has the capacity to understand
and oversee” complex AI systems. Can the human control the loop? Calls for human actors to be
the final arbiters of nuclear decisions, and maintain effective human oversight of decision-making
processes, collide with the automation bias already discussed and with the speed, scale, complexity,
opacity, and incomprehensibility of AI-enabled systems examined in subsequent contributions to
this Special Issue. If the moment ever arrives, the decision to use nuclear weapons will be taken by a
small group of human beings (in the United States the president alone has “sole authority” to order
nuclear employment) who, even while remaining formally in the nuclear-decision-making loop, risk
having their roles collapse into merely endorsing computer-generated outputs that are imbued with
authority and that they can neither understand nor effectively audit.
And will there be a single loop? Modern governments are large, complex bureaucracies filled with
competing interests and organizations that are likely to use AI in their own way for their own pur-
poses. In the realm of intelligence, the United States is probably an extreme example of this reality:
its intelligence community is comprised of 18 different civilian and military organizations, loosely
overseen by a Director of National Intelligence, with an aggregate annual budget in excess of $100
billion (Office of the Director of National Intelligence,2025). In theory, it is possible to imagine that
this enormous complex will provide the President with clear, coherent, consolidated AI-informed
advice, but, in practice, these organizations are often jealous of their own roles and prerogatives and
see others as rivals rather than partners. These “fiercely independent” units, as Dexter Filkins (2025)
has written, do not “cooperate smoothly.” Filkins (2025) quotes a Washington insider to illustrate the
point:
The Air Force won’t work with the Navy. The Army won’t work with the Air Force. The N.S.A.
[National Security Agency] won’t work with anybody. The National Reconnaissance Office
won’t work with anybody. The National Reconnaissance Office and the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency are both supposed to work with the N.S.A.—and they won’t talk to each
other.
In such an environment, it seems probable that different organizations, and even different groups
within an organization, will develop and utilize their own AI-enabled systems, each producing their
own analyses and outputs. This raises the possibility that the leader might receive competing AI-
generated assessments and recommendations. Even if intelligence procedures were to produce a
consolidated recommendation to the leader, this would nevertheless represent an amalgamation of,
or possibly a least common denominator among, alternative AI outputs. It is plausible that leaders,
at a moment of crisis and while contemplating the use of nuclear weapons, will have to contend with
multiple “loops”, compounding problems of deference and opacity.27
Despite these challenges, keeping humans in the loop is accepted as the only sensible response to
the possible application of AI to nuclear decision making. However, the risks and challenges associ-
ated with AI-informed decision making about nuclear weapons use also introduce a new family of
concerns about nuclear escalation (Chernavskikh & Palayer,2025).
5.3. AI and the stability of the nuclear balance
AI can also influence decision making about the use of nuclear weapons by its effect on the nuclear
balance, which can alter the incentives and calculations of leaders. This will depend on the character
of forces and doctrines and on whether the AI impacts are stabilizing or destabilizing, favorable or
unfavorable. As Lin (2025, p. 99) notes, “AI’s risks and benefits in nuclear command and control can-
not be assessed apart from a nation’s nuclear posture, which includes force structure, arrangements
27For a discussion of compounded (and institutionalized) deference to computer-generated outputs within formal organi-
sations, see Erskine & Davis (2025, pp. 14–15) on “institutional automation bias.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 14 ---
14 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
andinfrastructuresfornuclearcommandandcontrol,doctrine,andstrategicpriorities.”Astudyfrom
the US Center for Naval Analyses (McDonnell, Chesnut, Ditter, Fink & Lewis,2023, p. 24) similarly
links the intersection ofAI, doctrine, and force posture to the“risk calculus” of decision makers: “Use
of AI for nuclear operations also has the potential to increase the risk of nuclear mission failure or
escalation by altering the actual or perceived balance of military power among nuclear-armed states.
This is because the balance of military power is a powerful driver of leaders’ decisions to wage war or
to escalate an ongoing war.”
The rapidly emerging literature on AI and nuclear weapons is generally careful to recognize that
AI can have stabilizing as well as worrying consequences in the nuclear realm (and in military com-
petitions more broadly) and that the net impact is not inherently negative (Burdette, Mueller, Mitre
& Hoak,2025; see also Holmes & Wheeler,2024). There are, however, a number of ways in which
AI can potentially increase leaders’ confidence in their nuclear advantages (which they might wish
to exploit) or undermine their confidence in the survivability of their deterrent forces (which could
produce preemptive incentives to escalate in a crisis).28 Persistent surveillance combined with rapid
intelligence assessment can make mobile forces vulnerable, for example. More advanced ocean sens-
ing capabilities can improve antisubmarine warfare, raising risks to these key deterrence assets that
leadersmayworryaboutorseektoexploit.AImaycontributetocyberopportunitiesandvulnerabili-
ties involving preemptive attacks on nuclear command and control that seek to interrupt the capacity
tolaunchforces–so-called“leftoflaunch”attacks. 29 AIimprovementsinconventionalstrikecapabil-
ities could make them more threatening to nuclear assets of the other side. For the foreseeable future,
AI is unlikely to cause massive vulnerabilities that would invite disarming nuclear strikes, but AI-
induced increases in the vulnerability of deterrent forces could produce “destabilizing uncertainty”
in the minds of decisionmakers (Winter-Levy & Lalwani,2025). It is imaginable, in short, that the
integration of AI into nuclear force postures could result in vulnerabilities and instabilities, real or
perceived, that create potential incentives for nuclear use.
In sum, the AI-nuclear weapons nexus raises the most immediate existential concerns related to
the rise and adoption of AI. Its integration into the nuclear postures of nuclear armed states is hap-
pening and appears inevitable (Rautenbach,2022). This development reinforces the importance of
carefully examining the role of AI in resort-to-force decision making.
6. This special issue
Against this backdrop of change and uncertainty, the contributors to this Special Issue come together
from diverse disciplinary backgrounds – political science, international relations (IR), physics, law,
computer science, engineering, sociology, philosophy, and mathematics – to interrogate the risks
and opportunities that AI-driven systems would bring to resort-to-force decision making. In doing
so, they each reflect on particular challenges situated within one of the “four complications” that
we have suggested would accompany the infiltration of AI-enabled systems into deliberations over
whether and when to wage war (Erskine & Miller,2024a, pp. 139–40).30 These complications frame
the broader project from which this collection has emerged.
Complication 1 is concerned with the displacement of human judgment in AI-driven resort-
to-force decision making and what this would mean for both the unintended escalation of conflict
and deterrence theory. Simply, whether autonomously calculating and implementing a response to
a particular set of circumstances, or generating outputs to aid human decision makers, AI-driven
systems will neither “think” (an impossibility for such systems) nor behave as human actors do. This
28A concise overview how AI may affect nuclear forces is Johnson (2022).
29An example of this concern is Asghar (2025).
30Most contributions cut across more than one of the four “complications.” Here – and in the separate policy document that
outlines recommendations that follow from these studies – each contribution is placed within the category that represents its
most prominent theme. For the latest version of the policy recommendations, see Erskine et al. (2025b).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 15 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 15
could be profoundly consequential. When faced with an adversary, a state’s interpretation of that
adversary’s likelihood of engaging in armed conflict is based on the assumption that such choices are
guided by human deliberation, human forbearance, human fears, and human practices and rituals of
communication(suchassignallingtode-escalateconflict,forexample).TheuseofAI-drivensystems
can cause a disjuncture between this assumption and reality. This is perhaps most acute in cases
of automated self-defense, when machines are temporarily delegated the authority to both generate
and implement responses to indications of aggression without human intervention (and do this at
speeds beyond the capacity of human actors, thereby accelerating decision cycles). However, it is also
a risk when AI-enabled systems produce diagnostics and predictions that inform human decision
making – particularly when human actors accept these recommendations without question due to
their tendency to defer to machines, or when accelerated decision cycles diminish human oversight
and elevate algorithmic calculations. Both cases can result in unintended escalations in conflict and,
moreover, threaten to undermine assumptions relied upon for effective deterrence.
Turning to state-owned autonomous systems that could independently engage in actions that
would constitute the resort to war, Deeks ( 2025a) addresses aspects of this first complication.
Specifically, she constructs three scenarios in which such systems erroneously initiate war – the
“Flawed System,” the “Poisoned System,” and the “Competitive AI System” – and asks what standard
of care under international law a state must have adhered to in order to avoid international respon-
sibility. In the context of this important analysis, she hypothesizes sobering instances of unintended
escalation between autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) leading to war, including one scenario
where she suggests that a contributing factor to such escalation is the autonomous system’s inabil-
ity to decipher the signal that a warning shot is meant to convey (Deeks,2025a, p. 3). Continuing
this theme of misperception and unintended escalation in an AI-influenced strategic environment,
Zatsepina (2025) confronts the integration of AI in nuclear decision-making processes and its impli-
cationsfordeterrencestrategies.Revisitingtheprecarityofthe“AI-nuclearweaponsnexus”discussed
in Section 5, she highlights the problem of AI adding speed, opacity, and algorithmic biases to deci-
sion making, thereby radically disrupting the realist assumption that the threat of mutual destruction
will motivate rational actors to behave with caution. Finally, also motivated by a particular concern
for the impact of AI-enabled systems on deterrence and escalation dynamics, Assaad and Williams
(2025) turn specifically to decision-support systems, which they argue add complexity to the already-
complex decision-making processes that war initiation entails. They identify three dimensions of
complexity that current developments in AI are likely to introduce to resort-to-force decision mak-
ing in the near future – “interactive and nonlinear complexity,” “software complexity,” and “dynamic
complexity” – and explore how each poses risks that must be addressed.
Complication 2 takes us from the consequential differences between machines and human actors
in resort-to-force decision making to therelationshipthat human actors have with AI-driven systems
and the effects of their interaction. This complication brings the discussion back to the detrimental
impact of automation bias, or the tendency to accept computer-generated outputs – a tendency that
can make human decision makers less likely to use (and maintain) their own expertise and judgment.
It thereby highlights the dangers of deference and deskilling – including “moral deskilling” (Vallor,
2013) – that human actors face when they rely on AI-driven decision systems. It also raises questions
of trust: the degree to which human actors trust AI-driven systems, why, and even whether trust is
appropriate or warranted.
Adopting a “just war” perspective to assess the impact of AI-enabled decision-support systems on
resort-to-forcedecisionmaking,Renic( 2025)cautionsthatsuchsystemsdegradethemoralcharacter
of the human actors who rely on them. Specifically, these decision-support systems prevent human
decision makers from cultivating moral and political wisdom and what he calls a “tragic sensibility”
– dispositional qualities that are needed to navigate ethical decision making and “ask the right ques-
tions” in the context of resort-to-force deliberations. Adopting a more optimistic perspective on the
prospect of such “human-machine teaming,” Vold (2025) suggests that AI-enabled decision-support
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 16 ---
16 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
systems mightaugment rather than degrade the judgment and reasoning of commanders engaged in
strategicdeliberations.Shemaintainsthatpotentialopportunitieslie innon-autonomousAI-enabled
systems enhancing strategic reasoning in the war-room by limiting and prioritizing possible courses
of action, enhancing the mental modelling and visualization capacities of human actors, and mitigat-
ing the negative effects of specifically human vulnerabilities, such as emotional and physical fatigue.
Shifting the analysis from the anticipated risks and benefits of such reliance on AI-enabled systems to
the perceptionsof those senior officers who would constitute the human side of the “human-machine
team,” Lushenko (2025) asks what shapes military attitudes of trust in AI used for strategic-level
decision making. Based on an elite sample drawn from the US military, Lushenko provides the first
experimental evidence of how varying features of AI can inform servicemembers’ trust when faced
with the prospect of partnering with AI-driven systems in the context of strategic deliberations.
Complication 3 turns to algorithmic opacity and complexity and their potential implications for
democratic and international legitimacy and questions of accountability. When it comes to the deci-
sion to initiate (or continue fighting) a war, a state is expected to offer – andbe able to offer – a
compelling justification of its decision to do so, generally one that is consistent with international
norms and laws. This expectation is readily apparent in judgments by the international community
of Russia’s war in Ukraine and Israel’s bombardment of Gaza, for example, and, indeed, in the respec-
tive attempts by these states to justify their actions. This expectation is also evident in retrospective
evaluations of the United States’ and the United Kingdom’s espoused justifications for the 2003 inva-
sion of Iraq, including the United Kingdom’s own inquiry into, and subsequent reassessment of, its
original rationale.31 Yet, what if (near-) future decisions to wage war are informed by AI-enabled
systems in the ways we have described? Recall that the ML techniques that drive the autonomous
and non-autonomous systems that we have suggested will increasingly infiltrate resort-to-force deci-
sion making are known for their opacity and unpredictability. Whether these “black box” systems
independently calculate and carry out courses of action that would constitute a resort to force, or
play a dominant role in informing what are ostensibly human decisions, the lack of transparency and
auditability of their ML-generated outputs becomes profoundly problematic. Simply, a state going
to war may be unable either to explain or defend this decision adequately – or, indeed, fully under-
stand it. In addition, the AI-enabled decision-making process might seem somewhat beyond the
control of the state if this process relies on external actors, interests, and systems. Each of these fac-
tors could underminetheperceived legitimacy ofthestate’sdecision to resort toforce– vis-à-visboth
the international community and its own citizens – and, moreover, create a crisis of accountability if
the initiation of armed conflict is condemned as illegal or unjust.
AnticipatingjustsuchaproblemofaccountabilitywithinWesterndemocraciesifAIdisruptsstate-
level resort-to-force decision-making processes, Logan (2025) observes that bureaucracies within
these states produce documents when they deliberate over the initiation of armed conflict (such as
records of meetings, for example), which can then be appealed to in the wake of unjust and illegal
wars in order to hold relevant decision makers to account. Yet, will it be possible to answer questions
of accountability surrounding the decision to go to war when AI is inserted and replaces documented
processes with epistemic uncertainty? Logan addresses the resulting “problem of accountability” in
a strikingly novel way. Rather than advocating for the transparency of ML processes, she makes the
case for an alternative model of uncovering accountability in the context of AI-informed decisions,
one that draws on the rules of evidence in international criminal law and allows the apportioning of
accountability in the absence of both internal decision-making records and epistemic certainty.
Also concerned with challenges of accountability, Osoba (2025) asks how it is possible to man-
age the increased complexity that will accompany the integration of AI into resort-to-force decision
31By the UK’s self-assessment of its decision to go to war against Iraq in 2003, we refer to the Chicot Inquiry (Chilcot,2016).
For a discussion, see Erskine and Davis (2025, pp. 10–11).
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 17 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 17
making. Following an incisive analysis of the new “AI-human hybrid military decision-making orga-
nizations” central to these deliberations, he turns to the challenge of governing such bodies. Osoba
(2025, p. 1) emphasizes that “[t]he stability of the international political ecosystem requires respon-
sible state actors to subject their national security operations (including the decision to resort to
war) to international norms and ethical mandates” and makes a case for “a minimal AI governance
standard framework,” which he argues will provide the societal control of complex AI-augmented
decision systems necessary for such compliance (and, we would add, international legitimacy). This
can, he maintains, produce an “organisational culture of accountability.” Similarly concerned with
the complexity that accompanies the emerging influence of AI and big data on political and military
decision making, Hammond-Errey (2025) introduces the valuable notion of “architectures of AI” to
describe the infrastructure that shapes contemporary security and sovereignty. While acknowledg-
ing the imperative, addressed by Logan and Osoba, to subject states to scrutiny for their decisions on
the resort to force, she offers a different perspective on how AI-augmented decision making could
threaten states’ perceived legitimacy. Bringing the discussion back to the US-based “tech leviathans”
discussed in Section 3, she convincingly argues that current AI architectures concentrate power
amongst these companies, which opens up the possibility of Big Tech effectively undermining the
autonomy of states that rely on AI-enabled systems to make decisions on the resort to force.
Complication 4 addresseshowAI-enabledsystemsinteractwith,andconstitute,formalorganisa-
tionssuchasstatesandmilitaryinstitutions,alongwiththeeffectsofthisinteractionandconstitution.
SucheffectsincludethepossibilityofAI-enabledsystemsvariouslyenhancinganderodingthecapac-
itiesoftheseinstitutions,distortingordisruptingstrategicdecision-makingprocesses,organizational
structures, and chains of command, and even exacerbating organisational decision-making patholo-
gies. These effects also encompass changes made to institutional structures to prevent or mitigate
risks and disruptions caused by the steady infiltration of AI-enabled systems in the state’s decision-
making processes. Importantly, this complication entails a conceptional shift – one that focuses on
the organisation as a whole. In other words, while Complication 2 addresses the consequences of
the interactions between individual human actors and the AI-enabled systems that they rely on,
Complication 4 focuses on the relatively neglected phenomenon oforganisation-machine interaction
and its consequences.
In their contribution, Erskine and Davis (2025) argue that the integration of AI-enabled systems
into state-level decision making over whether and when to wage war will engender subtle but sig-
nificant changes to the state’s deliberative and organisational structures, its culture, and its capacities
– and in ways that could undermine its adherence to international norms of restraint. In making
this provocative claim, they propose that the gradual proliferation and embeddedness of AI-enabled
decision-support systems within the state – what they call the “phenomenon of ‘Borgs in the org”’
– will lead to changes that, together, threaten to lessen the state’s capacity for institutional learn-
ing. They warn that, as a result, the state’s responsiveness to external social cues and censure will
be weakened, thereby making the state less likely to engage with, internalize, and adhere to inter-
national constraints regarding the resort to force. Müller et al. (2025) likewise address the way that
theintegrationofAI-enabledsystemsintostate-leveldeliberationsovertheresorttoforcewillchange
existingorganisationalanddecision-makingstructures.Theyfocusspecificallyonanoftenneglected,
yet profoundly important, group within this emerging social-technical system: “the integrators,” or
that component of the larger decision-making structure responsible for linking the otherwise dis-
parate groups of “developers” and “users” in the context of political and military decision making.
Providing a valuable conceptualization of the relationships amongst these different groups of actors
and AI-driven decision systems, they demonstrate how structures change and are re-constituted by
the introduction of AI into new political and military deliberative processes.
While the previous two contributions analyse how bringing AI into decision making on the resort
to force will transform the state’s organisational and decision-making structures, the final two arti-
cles bothprescribe institutional change to preempt anticipated risks that would accompany reliance
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 18 ---
18 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
on such systems. Yee-Kuang Heng (2025) addresses how AI-driven decision-support systems that
would assist human calculations on the resort to force raise concerns that automation bias and
deskilling may contribute to the dangerous erosion of human judgment. He thereby touches on con-
cerns addressed within Complication 2, including by Renic (2025). Nevertheless, he is interested
specifically in how this risk is compounded by the complexities and pathologies of organisational
decision making, bringing his analysis squarely within the current complication. Rather than focus-
ing on improving AI models, he adopts an “institutional approach” to advocate for governments
providing training for human decision makers, questioning “groupthink“, and restructuring their
institutional settings in order to minimize these risks. Finally, like Heng, Sienknecht (2025) argues
that risks posed by the prospect of AI-enabled systems infiltrating resort-to-force decision making
should prompt proactive changes to the state’s organisational structure. The risk that Sienknecht
confronts is the “sociotechnical responsibility gap” brought on by the inability to attribute decisions
made or informed by AI-enabled systems to either the machines themselves or any one individual. If
such systems contribute to high-stakes political and military decision making, such as deliberations
over whether and when to wage war, she argues that we must establish “proxy responsibility” rela-
tions by which designated actors assume responsibility for these otherwise unattributable actions. To
make this possible, Sienknecht proposes what she describes as an “institutional response”: an advi-
sory “AI oversight body” that would create the structural conditions for such attributions of proxy
responsibility relations.
This collection of research articles raises problems and possibilities that accompany what we have
arguedistheimminentandinevitable(evennascent) directinfluenceofAI-enabledsystemsononeof
themostconsequentialdecisionsthatcanbemade:thedecisiontogotowar.Thequestionsandcorre-
sponding analyses provided in this collection are intended as prompts, provocations, and provisional
frameworks for future research on this crucial topic. We hope that the multidisciplinary discussions,
debates, and reciprocal learning from which these contributions have emerged continue in responses
to them – and in further critical engagement with the prospect of AI-driven systems increasingly
informing state-level decisions on the resort to force.
Funding statement. This project was supported by the Australian Government through a grant from the Department of
Defence.
Competing interests. The authors declare none.
References
Anduril. (2024, April 12). Anduril partners with OpenAI to advance U.S. Artificial Intelligence leadership and protect U.S.
andalliedforces .https://www.anduril.com/anduril-partners-with-openai-to-advance-u-s-artificial-intelligence-leadership-
and-protect-u-s/
Asghar, S.(2025,May23).AIatthenexusofnucleardeterrence:Enhancingleftoflaunchoperations. Nuclear Network.https://
nuclearnetwork.csis.org/ai-at-the-nexus-of-nuclear-deterrence-enhancing-left-of-launch-operations/
Assaad, Z. (2024, November 11).Meta now allows military agencies to access its AI software. It poses a moral dilemma for
everybody who uses it. The Conversation.https://doi.org/10.64628/AA.ydqkr4hhs
Assaad, Z. (2025, February 11).Google has dropped its promise not to use AI for weapons. It’s part of a troubling trend. The
Conversation. Retrieved February 1, 2025, fromhttpGaz://theconversation.com/google-has-dropped-its-promise-not-to-
use-ai-for-weapons-its-part-of-a-troubling-trend-249169
Assaad, Z., & Williams, E. (2025). Technology and tactics: The intersection of safety, AI, and the resort to force.Cambridge
Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–15.
Bacciarelli, A. (2025, February 6). Google announces willingness to develop AI for weapons.Human Rights Watch. Retrieved
May 31, 2025, fromhttps://www.hrw.org/news/2025/02/06/google-announces-willingness-develop-ai-weapons
Belanger, A. (2025, March 13). OpenAI declares AI race “over” if training on copyrighted works isn’t fair use .
ArsTechnica. https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2025/03/openai-urges-trump-either-settle-ai-copyright-debate-or-lose-
ai-race-to-china/
Berger, V .(2025, March 15).The AI copyright battle: Why Open AI and Google are pushing for fair use. Forbes.https://www.
forbes.com/sites/virginieberger/2025/03/15/the-ai-copyright-battle-why-openai-and-google-are-pushing-for-fair-use/
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 19 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 19
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies. Oxford University Press.
Burdette, Z., Mueller, K., Mitre, J., & Hoak, L. (2025, July 15). Six ways AI could cause the next big war, and why it proba-
bly won’t.Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.https://thebulletin.org/premium/2025-07/six-ways-ai-could-cause-the-next-big-
war-and-why-it-probably-wont/
Bureau of Arms Control, Verification, and Deterrence . (2023, November 9).Political declaration on responsible military
use of artificial intelligence and autonomy. Department of State.https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/Latest-
Version-Political-Declaration-on-Responsible-Military-Use-of-AI-and-Autonomy.pdf
Butcher, S. I.(2005). The Russell-Einstein Manifesto1; (Pugwash History Series). Pugwash Conferences on Science and World
Affairs. Retrieved September 1, 2025, fromhttps://pugwash.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/2005_history_origins_of_
manifesto3.pdf
Cellan-Jones, R. (2014, December 2). Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind.BBC News. Retrieved
July 13, 2025, fromhttps://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540
Center for AI Safety. (2023, May 30).Statement on AI risk. Retrieved July 15, 2023, fromhttps://www.safe.ai/statement-on-
ai-risk
Chernavskikh, V ., & Palayer, J. (2025). Impact of military artificial intelligence on nuclear escalation risk . Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute. (6/2025; SIPRI Insights on Peace and Security).
Chilcot S. J. 2016 The Report of the Iraq Inquiry: Executive Summary. (HC 264). Retrieved October 2, 2024, fromhttps://
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a80f42ced915d74e6231626/The_Report_of_the_Iraq_Inquiry_-_Executive_
Summary.pdf
Clegg, N. (2024, November 4). Open source AI can help America lead in AI and strengthen global security.Meta Newsroom.
https://about.fb.com/news/2024/11/open-source-ai-america-global-security/
Cummings, M. L. (2006). Automation and accountability in decision support system interface design.Journal of Technology
Studies, 32(1), 23–31.
Cummings, M. L. (2015). Automation bias in intelligent time critical decision support systems. In D. Harris & W.-C. Li (Eds.),
Decision making in aviation(pp. 289–294). London: Routledge.https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315095080-17
Davies, H., McKernan, B., & Sabbagh, D. (2023, December 1). ‘The Gospel’: How Israel uses AI to select bombing targets in
Gaza. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/dec/01/the-gospel-how-israel-uses-ai-to-select-bombing-
targets
Davis, J. L. (2024). Elevating humanism in high-stakes automation: Experts-in-the-loop and resort-to-force decision making.
Australian Journal of International Affairs, 78(2), 200–209.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2328293
Deeks, A. (2024). Delegating war initiation to machines. Australian Journal of International Affairs , 78(2), 148–153.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2327375
Deeks, A. (2025a). State responsibility for AI mistakes in the resort to force.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1,
1–12.
Deeks, A., Lubell, N., & Murray, D. (2019). Machine learning, artificial intelligence, and the use of force by states.Journal of
National Security Law and Policy, 10(1), 1–25.
Deeks, A. S. (2025b). The double black box: National security, Artificial Intelligence, and the struggle for democratic accountabil-
ity. Oxford University Press.
Depp, M., & Scharre, P . (2024, January 16). Artificial intelligence and nuclear stability. War on the Rocks . https://
warontherocks.com/2024/01/artificial-intelligence-and-nuclear-stability/
Desmarais, A. (2025, June 26).US Army recruits tech execs. This is who will be joining as reserve members. Euronews.http://
www.euronews.com/next/2025/06/26/us-army-recruits-tech-execs-this-is-who-will-be-joining-as-reserve-members
Douthat, R. (2025, October 30). What Palantir sees: The tech company’s C.T.O. on surveillance, A.I. and the future of
war [Audio podcast]. Retrieved November 2, 2025, fromhttps://www.nytimes.com/2025/10/30/opinion/palantir-shyam-
sankar-military.html
Egan, L., & Kine, P . (2024, November 16).Biden’s final meeting with Xi Jinping reaps agreement on AI and nukes. Politico.
Retrieved September 1, 2025, fromhttps://www.politico.com/news/2024/11/16/biden-xi-jinping-ai-00190025
Erskine, T.(2024a). AI and the future of IR: Disentangling flesh-and-blood, institutional, and synthetic moral agency in world
politics. Review of International Studies, 50(3), 534–559.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210524000202
Erskine, T. (2024b). Before algorithmic Armageddon: Anticipating immediate risks to restraint when AI infiltrates decisions
to wage war.Australian Journal of International Affairs, 78(2), 175–190.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2345636
Erskine, T., & Davis, J. L. (2025). “Borgs in the org” and the decision to wage war: The impact of AI on institutional learning
and the exercise of restraint.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–12.
Erskine, T., & Miller, S. E. (2024a). AI and the decision to go to war: Future risks and opportunities.Australian Journal of
International Affairs, 78(2), 135–147.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2349598
Erskine, T., & Miller, S. E.(Eds.). (2024b). Anticipating the future of war: AI, automated systems, and resort-to-force decision
making [Special issue].Australian Journal of International Affairs, 78(2). https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2349598
Erskine, T., Miller, S. E., Assaad, Z., Baggiarini, B., Chiodo, M., Davis, J. L., … Zatsepina, L. (2025a). AI, automated sys-
tems, and resort-to-force decision making – Policy recommendations: Submission to the UN Secretary General pertaining
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 20 ---
20 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
to A/RES/79/239. Retrieved July 1, 2025, from https://docs-library.unoda.org/General_Assembly_First_Committee_-
Eightieth_session_(2025)/79-239-Australia-Natl-Univ-EN.pdf
Erskine, T., Miller, S. E., Assaad, Z., Baggiarini, B., Chiodo, M., Davis, J. L., … Zatsepina, L. (2025b, August 31).
AI, automated systems, and resort-to-force decision making – policy recommendations. Extended submission to
the Australian department of defence. Available at: https://bellschool.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/2025-09/AI%
20Automated%20Systems%20and%20Resort-to-Force%20Decision%20Making%20Policy%20Report%20-%20Final%
20%28Aug.%202025%29.pdf
Ferran, L. (2024, December 5). Anduril, OpenAI enter “strategic partnership” to use AI against drones.Breaking Defense.
https://breakingdefense.com/2024/12/anduril-openai-enter-strategic-partnership-to-use-ai-against-drones/
Filkins, D. (2025, July 14). Is the U.S. ready for the next war?The New Yorker. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2025/
07/21/is-the-us-ready-for-the-next-war
France, United Kingdom, & United States . (2022, July 29). Working paper – Principles and responsible practices for
Nuclear Weapon States. NPT/Conf.2020/WP.70. United Nations. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n22/446/53/
pdf/n2244653.pdf
Frenkel, S. (2025, August 4). The militarization of Silicon Valley.The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/04/
technology/google-meta-openai-military-war.html
Garcia, D. (2023). The AI military race: Common good governance in the age of artificial intelligence. Oxford University Press.
Google. (2025, February).Our AI principles.. Retrieved May 31, 2025, fromhttps://ai.google/principles/
Government of the Netherlands. (2023, February 16).REAIM 2023 call to action. Ministerie van Algemene Zaken. Retrieved
May 1, 2025, fromhttps://www.government.nl/documents/publications/2023/02/16/reaim-2023-call-to-action
Hammond-Errey, M. (2025). Architectures of AI: Tech power broking war?Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1,
1–21.
Haner, J., & Garcia, D. (2019). The artificial intelligence arms race: Trends and world leaders in autonomous weapons
development.Global Policy, 10(3), 331–337.https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12713
Hao, K. (2025). Empire of AI: Inside the reckless race for total domination. Allen Lane.
Heng, Y ee-Kuang(2025). Upskillling human actors against AI automation bias in strategic decision making on the resort to
force.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance, 1, 1–15.
Holmes, M., & Wheeler, N. J. (2024). The role of artificial intelligence in nuclear crisis decision making: A complement, not
a substitute.Australian Journal of International Affairs, 78(2), 164–174.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2333814
Horowitz, M. C., & Lin-Greenberg, E. (2022). Algorithms and influence artificial intelligence and crisis decision-making.
International Studies Quarterly, 66(4), sqac069.https://doi.org/10.1093/isq/sqac069
How America built an AI tool to predict Taliban attacks . (2024, July 31). The Economist. https://www.economist.com/
science-and-technology/2024/07/31/how-america-built-an-ai-tool-to-predict-taliban-attacks
Johnson, J. (2022, July 29). AI, autonomy, and the risk of nuclear war.War on the Rocks. https://warontherocks.com/2022/07/
ai-autonomy-and-the-risk-of-nuclear-war/
Jones, C. R., & Bergen, B. K. (2025). Large language models pass the Turing test(arXiv:2503.23674). arXiv.https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2503.23674
Karp, A. C. (2023, July 25). Our Oppenheimer moment: The creation of A.I. weapons.The New York Times. https://www.
nytimes.com/2023/07/25/opinion/karp-palantir-artificial-intelligence.html
Kasirzadeh, A., & Gyevnar, B. (2025). AI safety for everyone.Nature Machine Intelligence 7, 531–542.
Kleinman, Z. (2023, May 30). AI “godfather” Yoshua Bengio feels “lost” over life’s work.BBC News. Retrieved July 15, 2023,
from https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-65760449
Knight, W .(2023, September 7).The generative AI boom could fuel a new international arms race. Wired.https://www.wired.
com/story/fast-forward-generative-ai-could-fuel-a-new-international-arms-race/
Leins, K., & Kaspersen, A. (2021, November 9).Seven myths of using the term “human on the loop”: “Just what do you think
you are doing, Dave?”Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs.https://www.carnegiecouncil.org/media/article/
7-myths-of-using-the-term-human-on-the-loop
Levy, S. (2025, June 20). What big tech’s band of execs will do in the Army.Wired. https://www.wired.com/story/what-lt-col-
boz-and-big-techs-enlisted-execs-will-do-in-the-army/
Lin, H. (2025). Artificial intelligence and nuclear weapons: A commonsense approach to understanding costs and benefits.
Texas National Security Review, 8(3), 98–109.
Logan, S. (2024). Tell me what you don’t know: Large language models and the pathologies of intelligence analysis.Australian
Journal of International Affairs, 78(2), 220–228.https://doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2024.2331733
Logan, S. (2025). Certainty and algorithmic transparency in the decision to go to war: Lessons from evidentiary approaches
in international criminal law.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–16.
Lushenko, P .(2025). AI, trust, and the war-room: Evidence from a conjoint experiment in the US military.Cambridge Forum
on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–24.
Manyika, J., & Hassabis, D. (2025, February 4).Responsible AI: Our 2024 report and ongoing work. Google. Retrieved April 7,
2025, fromhttps://blog.google/technology/ai/responsible-ai-2024-report-ongoing-work/
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 21 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 21
McChrystal, S., & Roy, A. (2023, June 19). AI has entered the situation room.Foreign Policy. https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/
06/19/ai-artificial-intelligence-national-security-foreign-policy-threats-prediction/
McDonnell, T., Chesnut, M., Ditter, T., Fink, A., & Lewis, L. (2023). Artificial intelligence in nuclear operations: Challenges,
opportunities, and impacts(IRM-2023-U-035284-Final; p. 66). Center for Naval Analyses. Retrieved September 1, 2025,
from https://www.cna.org/reports/2023/04/Artificial-Intelligence-in-Nuclear-Operations.pdf
Meta. (2025, April).Llama 4 acceptable use policy. Retrieved May 28, 2025, fromhttps://www.llama.com/llama4/use-policy/
Metz, C. (2023, May 1). ‘The godfather of A.I.’ leaves Google and warns of danger ahead.The New York Times. Retrieved July
14, 2025, fromhttps://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/01/technology/ai-google-chatbot-engineer-quits-hinton.html
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea . (2024, September 12). Outcome of Responsible AI in Military Domain
(REAIM) Summit 2024. Republic of Korea. Retrieved May 1, 2025, from https://tls.mofa.go.kr/eng/brd/m_5674/view.
do?seq=321057
Moorhead, P .(2024, November 4).Meta extends Llama support to U.S. government for national security. Forbes.https://www.
forbes.com/sites/patrickmoorhead/2024/11/04/meta-extends-llama-support-to-us-government-for-national-security/
Mosier, K. L., & Manzey, D. (2019). Humans and automated decision aids: A match made in heaven? In K. L. Mosier &
D. Manzoor (Eds.),Human performance in automated and autonomous systems(pp. 19–42). CRC Press.https://doi.org/10.
14279/depositonce-10992
Müller, D., Chiodo, M., & Sienknecht, M. (2025). Integrators at war: Mediating in AI-assisted resort-to-force decisions.
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–25.
Nichols, T. (2025a, June 26). The president’s weapon.The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2025/08/
nuclear-command-control-football-iran/683256/
Nichols, T. (2025b, September 1). Our AI fears run long and deep.The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/
2025/09/ai-movies-popular-culture/684063/
Ó hÉigeartaigh, S. (2025a). The most dangerous fiction: The rhetoric and reality of the AI race(SSRN Scholarly Paper 5278644
1–26 ).https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5278644
Ó hÉigeartaigh, S. (2025b, March 27). What comes after the Paris AI summit?RUSI. Retrieved June 29, 2025, fromhttps://
www.rusi.org.
O’Hanlon, M. E. (2025, February 28). How unchecked AI could trigger a nuclear war.Brookings Commentary. Retrieved
September 1, 2025, fromhttps://www.brookings.edu/articles/how-unchecked-ai-could-trigger-a-nuclear-war/
Office of the Director of National Intelligence. (2025).U.S. Intelligence community budget. Office of the Director of National
Intelligence. Retrieved November 11, 2025, fromhttps://www.dni.gov/index.php/what-we-do/ic-budget
Osoba, O. (2025). AI governance for military decision making: A proposal for managing complexity.Cambridge Forum on AI:
Law and Governance1, 1–11.
The Outpost. (2024, November 8).Anthropic partners with Palantir and AWS to bring AI to US defense and intelligence.https://
theoutpost.ai/news-story/anthropic-partners-with-palantir-and-aws-to-bring-ai-to-us-defense-and-intelligence-8051/
Palantir. (2024, November 7).Anthropic and Palantir partner to bring Claude AI models to AWS for U.S. government intelli-
gence and defense operations. Business Wire.https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20241107699415/en/Anthropic-
and-Palantir-Partner-to-Bring-Claude-AI-Models-to-AWS-for-U.S.-Government-Intelligence-and-Defense-Operations
Pichai, S. (2018, June 7).AI at Google: Our principles. Google. Retrieved May 8, 2025, fromhttps://blog.google/technology/
ai/ai-principles/
Puwal, S. (2024, April 12).Should artificial intelligence be banned from nuclear weapons systems?NATO Review.https://www.
nato.int/docu/review/articles/2024/04/12/should-artificial-intelligence-be-banned-from-nuclear-weapons-systems/index.
html
Rautenbach, P .(2022,September). On integrating artificial intelligence with nuclear control.ArmsControlAssociation. https://
www.armscontrol.org/act/2022-09/features/integrating-artificial-intelligence-nuclear-control
REAIM. (2024, September).Responsible AI in the Military Domain: REAIM Blueprint for Action. Digital Watch Observatory.
RetrievedMay1,2025,from https://dig.watch/resource/responsible-ai-in-the-military-domain-reaim-blueprint-for-action
Renic, N. (2025). AI-optimized violence and the suffocation of moral and political wisdom.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and
Governance 1, 1–10.
Roose, K. (2023, May 30). A.I. poses ‘risk of extinction,’ industry leaders warn.The New York Times. Retrieved May 1, 2025,
from https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/30/technology/ai-threat-warning.html
Rosenberg, S. (2024, November 8).Anthropic, Palantir, Amazon team up on defense AI. Axios.https://www.axios.com/2024/
11/08/anthropic-palantir-amazon-claude-defense-ai
Sadashiv, S. (2024, November 5). Meta to provide U.S. defence agencies access to Llama AI models.Medianama. https://www.
medianama.com/2024/11/223-meta-to-provide-u-s-defence-agencies-access-to-its-llama-ai-models/
The Scale T eam. (2024, November 5).Defense Llama: The LLM purpose-built for American national security. Scale AI.https://
scale.com/blog/defense-llama
Scharre, P .(2021). Debunking the AI Arms Race Theory.Texas National Security Review, 4(3), 122–132.
Schmid, S., Lambach, D., Diehl, C., & Reuter, C. (2025). Arms race or innovation race? Geopolitical AI development.
Geopolitics, 1–30.https://doi.org/10.1080/14650045.2025.2456019
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 22 ---
22 Toni Erskine and Steven Miller
Shanklin, W . (2024, December 4). OpenAI signs deal with Palmer Luckey’s Anduril to develop military AI . Engadget.
Retrieved February 1, 2025, from https://www.engadget.com/ai/openai-signs-deal-with-palmer-luckeys-anduril-to-
develop-military-ai-213356951.html
Sienknecht, M. (2025). Institutionalizing proxy responsibility: AI oversight bodies and resort-to-force decision making.
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–19.
Simonite, T.(2017, September 8). Artificial intelligence fuels new global arms race.Wired. https://www.wired.com/story/for-
superpowers-artificial-intelligence-fuels-new-global-arms-race/
Skitka, L. J., Mosier, K. L., & Burdick, M. (1999). Does automation bias decision-making?International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 51(5), 991–1006.https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1999.0252
Stokes, J., Kahl, C. H., Kendall-Taylor, A., & Lokker, N. (2025). Averting AI armageddon: U.S.-China-Russia rivalry at the
nexus of nuclear weapons and artificial intelligence. Center for a New American Security.
Suchman, L. (2023). Imaginaries of omniscience: Automating intelligence in the US Department of Defense.Social Studies of
Science, 53(5), 761–786.https://doi.org/10.1177/03063127221104938
Turing, A. M.(1950). Computing machinery and intelligence.Mind, 59(236), 433–460.https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/lix.236.
433
United Nations. (1945). United Nations Charter. Retrieved July 6, 2024, fromhttps://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/
full-text
United Nations. (2024, December 19).Secretary-General tells Security Council that ‘AI’ must never equal ‘advancing inequality,’
urging safe, secure, inclusive future for technology. Retrieved March 10, 2025, fromhttps://press.un.org/en/2024/sgsm22500.
doc.htm
United Nations CCW (2019, November 8).Report of the 2019 session of the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging
Technologies in the Area of Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems. , CCW/GGE.1/2019/3/Add.1.https://docs-library.unoda.
org/Convention_on_Certain_Conventional_Weapons_-_Group_of_Governmental_Experts_(2019)/1919338E.pdf
United Nations, General Assembly . (2023, December 28). Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December
2023—Lethal autonomous weapons systems. A/RES/78/241. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n23/431/11/pdf/
n2343111.pdf
United Nations, General Assembly . (2024, December 31).Resolution adopted by the General Assembly – Artificial intelli-
gence in the military domain and its implications for international peace and security. A/RES/79/239.https://unidir.org/wp-
content/uploads/2025/03/UN_General_Assembly_A_RES_79_239-EN.pdf
United Nations, General Assembly . (2025, June 5). Report of the Secretary-General—Artificial intelligence in the military
domain and its implications for international peace and security. A/80/78. https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n25/
107/66/pdf/n2510766.pdf
US Department of Defense. (2022).2022 Nuclear Posture Review. Retrieved September 1, 2025, fromhttps://media.defense.
gov/2022/Oct/27/2003103845/-1/-1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.pdf
US Department of Defense . (2024).Report on the nuclear employment strategy of the United States(B-56D699F). Retrieved
September 1, 2025, from https://media.defense.gov/2024/Nov/15/2003584623/-1/-1/1/REPORT-ON-THE-NUCLEAR-
EMPLOYMENT-STRATEGY-OF-THE-UNITED-STATES.PDF
US Department of W ar. (2025, December 9). The War Department Unleashes AI on New GenAI.mil Platform. Retrieved
December 10, 2025, from https://www.war.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/4354916/the-war-department-unleashes-
ai-on-new-genaimil-platform/.
V allor, S.(2013). The future of military virtue: Autonomous systems and the moral deskilling of the military. In K. Podens,
J.Stinissen&M.Maybaum(Eds.), Proceedingsof5thInternationalConferenceonCyberConflict(CyCon2013) (pp.471–486).
NATO CCD COE.
V allor, S.(2024). The AI mirror: How to reclaim our humanity in an age of machine thinking. Oxford University Press.
Vega, C., & Johns, E. (2024, July 22). Humans should teach AI how to avoid nuclear war—While they still can.Bulletin of
the Atomic Scientists.https://thebulletin.org/2024/07/humans-should-teach-ai-how-to-avoid-nuclear-war-while-they-still-
can/
Vold, K. (2025). Augmenting military decision making with artificial intelligence. Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and
Governance 1, 1–13.
Wiggers, K. (2024, November 7). Anthropic teams up with Palantir and AWS to sell AI to defense customers.TechCrunch.
Retrieved March 1, 2025, fromhttps://techcrunch.com/2024/11/07/anthropic-teams-up-with-palantir-and-aws-to-sell-its-
ai-to-defense-customers/
Winter-Levy, S., & Lalwani, N. (2025, August 7). The end of mutual assured destruction? Foreign Affairs. https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/united-states/artificial-intelligence-end-mutual-assured-destruction
Wong, Y . H., Y urchak, J., Button, R. W ., Frank, A. B., Laird, B., Osoba, O. A., … Bae, S. J. (2020). Deterrence in the age
of thinking machines. RAND Corporation. Retrieved October 1, 2024, fromhttps://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RR2797.html
Y uval, A.(2024, April 3). “Lavender”: The AI machine directing Israel’s bombing spree in Gaza.+972 Magazine. https://www.
972mag.com/lavender-ai-israeli-army-gaza/
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 23 ---
Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance 23
Zatsepina, L. (2025). Waltzing into uncertainty: AI in nuclear decision making and the challenge of divergent deterrence
logics. Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance1, 1–15.
T oni Erskineis Professor of International Politics in the Coral Bell School of Asia Pacific Affairs at the Australian National
University(ANU).SheisalsoAssociateFellowoftheLeverhulmeCentrefortheFutureofIntelligenceatCambridgeUniversity,
Chief Investigator of the “Anticipating the Future of War: AI, Automated Systems, and Resort-to-Force Decision Making”
Research Project, funded by the Australian Government through a grant by Defence, and recipient of the International Studies
Association’s 2024-25 Distinguished Scholar Award in International Ethics.
Steven E. Miller is Director of the International Security Program in the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at
Harvard University’s Kennedy School of Government. He also serves as Editor-in-Chief of the scholarly journal,International
Security, and co-editor of the International Security Program’s book series, BCSIA Studies in International Security (published
by MIT Press). He is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, where he is member of (and formerly chaired)
the Committee on International Security Studies (CISS). He is also member of the Council of International Pugwash.
Cite this article: Erskine, T., & Miller, S.E. (2025). Computer says,“war”: AI and resort-to-force decision making in a context
of rapid change and global uncertainty.Cambridge Forum on AI: Law and Governance, 1, e47, 1–23.https://doi.org/10.1017/
cfl.2025.10041
https://doi.org/10.1017/cfl.2025.10041 Published online by Cambridge University Press