--- Page 1 ---
Critical Commentary
Urban Studies
2024, Vol. 61(6) 1168–1182
/C211Urban Studies Journal Limited 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/00420980231203386
journals.sagepub.com/home/usj
The rise of AI urbanism in
post-smart cities: A critical
commentary on urban artificial
intelligence
Federico Cugurullo
T rinity College Dublin, Ireland
Federico Caprotti
University of Exeter, UK
Matthew Cook
The Open University, UK
Andrew Karvonen
Lund University, Sweden
Pauline McGuirk
University of Wollongong, Australia
Simon Marvin
The University of Sydney, Australia
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) is emerging as an impactful feature of the life, planning and governance
of 21st-century cities. Once confined to the realm of science fiction and small-scale technological
experiments, AI is now all around us, in the shape of urban artificial intelligences including autono-
mous cars, robots, city brains and urban software agents. The aim of this article is to critically
examine the nature of urbanism in the emergent age of AI. More specifically, we shed light on
how urban AI is impacting the development of cities, and argue that an urbanism influenced by AI,
which we termAI urbanism, differs in theory and practice from smart urbanism. In the future, the
Corresponding author:
Federico Cugurullo, Department of Geography, T rinity
College Dublin, University of Dublin, Museum Building,
Dublin 2, D02 PN40, Ireland.
Email: cugurulf@tcd.ie

--- Page 2 ---
rise of a post-smart urbanism driven by AI has the potential to form autonomous cities that
transcend, theoretically and empirically, traditional smart cities. The article compares common
practices and understandings of smart urbanism with emerging forms of urban living, urban gov-
ernance and urban planning influenced by AI. It critically discusses the limitations and potential
pitfalls of AI urbanism and offers conceptual tools and a vocabulary to understand the urbanity of
AI and its impact on present and future cities.
Keywords
AI urbanism, artificial intelligence, autonomous city, post-smart cities, smart urbanism, urban AI
Received June 2022; accepted August 2023
Introduction: The urbanity of AI
Artificial intelligence (AI) is emerging as an
impactful feature of the life, planning and
governance of 21st-century cities. Once con-
fined to the realm of science fiction and small-
scale technological experiments, AI has now
entered theage of implementation charac-
terised by mass distribution and a wide range
of real-world applications (Lee, 2018).
Urbanists have noted that many of these
applications can be found in cities, which are
particularly attractive targets for AI imple-
mentation, due to their concentration of tech-
nologically advanced infrastructure (necessary
to run complex AI systems) and high
population densities that produce demand for
new AI technologies as well as a sufficient
return on investment (Barns, 2021; Cugurullo,
2020; Macrorie et al., 2021; Son et al., 2023).
During its evolution, AI has taken several
urban forms. Some of these are visible, tan-
gible and observable in many cities. Cars
and trucks driven by AI are being mass-
produced by companies such as Tesla and
Volvo. They are no longer restricted to
remote testing facilities, but are increasingly
sold and deployed on public roads in ordi-
nary urban settlements (Acheampong et al.,
2021). Autonomous vehicles (AVs) represent
an AI technology that has already been ‘set
free’ and is now reshaping urban mobility as
well as the logistics of the supply chains that
sustain urban economies (Dowling and
McGuirk, 2022; Hopkins, 2023; Tennant
and Stilgoe, 2021: 848). Robots, ranging
from androids to drones, operate across a
variety of urban sectors, ‘appearing and per-
forming specific functions in public spaces’
Cugurullo et al. 1169

--- Page 3 ---
(Mintrom et al., 2021: 123; While et al.,
2021). Nowadays, service robots deal
with human customers in shops, restaurants
and airports (Lin, 2022; Lynch, 2021).
Meanwhile, a growing number of drones are
delivering goods in cities and keeping the
built environment under continuous surveil-
lance (Jackman and Brickell, 2021). The
more-than-human fauna of the city has
expanded, and urban robotics is its latest
addition.
Other urban incarnations of AI, such as
city brains, are less visible and tangible, but
their impact on cities can be substantial
nonetheless. City brains are large-scale AIs
residing in vast digital urban platforms and
capable of managing multiple urban domains
including transport, safety, health, environ-
mental monitoring and planning, in real time
(Caprotti and Liu, 2020; Curran and Smart,
2021). This urban AI is emerging particularly
in China, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia. CCTV
cameras, often equipped with facial recogni-
tion technology, serve as the eyes of city
brains to observe urban spaces and develop a
situational awareness. Predictive analytics
are coupled with city brains to predict future
urban conditions and govern collective ser-
vices in an anticipatory manner (Cugurullo,
2021). Last but not least, a myriad of AIs
have entered our cities and everyday life via
apps and computer programs. Although we
cannot touch them, their effects are tangible:
contact-tracing apps that decide who must
isolate at home to meet quarantine require-
ments (Kitchin, 2020); algorithms that calcu-
late who will qualify for a home mortgage
(O’Neil, 2016). These urban software agents
are ubiquitous and deeply agentic despite
their seeming immateriality (Cugurullo,
2020).
Autonomous vehicles, robots, city brains
and urban software agents are currently the
most prominent categories of urban artificial
intelligence. The concept of urban AI refers to
artificial intelligences that operate and take
material form in urban spaces, urban technol-
ogies and urban infrastructures (Cugurullo,
2021; Luusua et al., 2023). On the one hand,
urban AI reflects the core capabilities that are
generally found in AI technology: acquiring
data by sensing the surrounding environment
(Russell and Norvig, 2016); making sense of
data by extracting concepts from what is
being sensed (ranging fromstop when an
autonomous car sees the color red on a traffic
light, tointruder when a home surveillance
drone senses the presence of a stranger), and
thus showing a rudimentary form of thinking
(Bostrom, 2017); handling uncertainty (Pearl,
2014); and acting rationally in an autonomous
manner without human guidance (Cugurullo,
2020). On the other hand, the notion of urban
AI stresses the urbanity of artificial intelli-
gence or, in other words, the quality of AI of
being urban. This quality is manifested in a
threefold manner.
First, AI needs the city in order to increase
and improve its intelligence. Artificial intelli-
gence can only develop through the acquisi-
tion of data. As Lee (2018: 14) succinctly
notes, ‘there’s no data like more data.’ In
terms of quantity, cities are enormous gen-
erators of data, because they are the primary
locus of human societies, where intense and
manifold human activities occur. In terms of
quality, cities offer the best possible data for
AI to learn from: real-life data, as opposed to
carefully curated and cleaned datasets that
are modelled on a computer. Urban AI
learns in the wild by observing the messy
dynamics of real-world urban environments.
The life of urban AI intersects with the life of
cities, because these are AI technologies
designed and programmed to interact with
humans and to mediate socio-economic
activities that occur primarily in urban
spaces, and thus deviate from the many AIs
employed, for instance, to automate agricul-
ture in rural areas or that are located under
the sea and in outer space. Second, most AIs
need a material base to operate and all AIs
1170 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 4 ---
need spaces to act upon because their activi-
ties always take place somewhere, whether it
is a road where an autonomous car is driving
or an apartment whose market value has
been calculated by an algorithm (Fields,
2022; Safransky, 2020). The city gives AI a
material iteration, situating it in the physical
landscape. Third, AI is being infused into the
governance of cities, and it has the potential
to create the autonomous city where human
agency might be overshadowed by the agency
of urban AI (Cugurullo, 2021). This trajec-
tory points towards a distinctly different type
of city than exists today and raises questions
about the opportunities and drawbacks pre-
sented by the contemporary rollout of urban
artificial intelligences and their potential
impact on urban futures.
The aim of this article is to critically
examine the nature of urbanism in the age of
urban AI. More specifically, we seek to shed
light on how urban AI is influencing the life,
governance and planning of cities. The focus
is on emerging AI technologies that can
already be found in the contemporary city,
albeit on a limited scale, in an attempt to
capture the likely urban transformations
that will define the city of the future. We
suggest that an urbanism influenced by arti-
ficial intelligences, which we termAI urban-
ism, differs in theory and practice from
smart urbanism. We develop our argument
in three steps. First, we compare the core
characteristics of smart urbanism with those
of AI urbanism. Second, we employ this
comparison as a stepping stone to articulate
the main issues associated with AI urbanism,
by connecting each issue with a critical ques-
tion, to generate debate and stimulate future
research in urban studies. Third, we pose as
key questions the extent to which AI urban-
ism is leading to the formation of autono-
mous cities and how these might differ from
smart cities, expressing doubt about the need
to integrate AI into the lifeblood of the con-
temporary city.
AI urbanism versus smart
urbanism
The news media often promotes a false
impression of AI as a cutting-edge technol-
ogy intertwined with narratives of innova-
tion. In reality, artificial intelligence both as
a technology and as a field of research has
existed for many years and its inception can
be traced back to the 1950s. What is novel
these days is the large-scale implementation
of AI technology and its filtering into urban
spaces and infrastructures, through urban
artificial intelligences (such as autonomous
vehicles, robots, city brains and urban soft-
ware agents) whose application in the life,
governance and planning of cities is generat-
ing a new urbanism: AI urbanism.
AI has a complex past and an even
more complicated present. We are facing a
decades-long strand of technological innova-
tion that has only recently gone mainstream,
and in the study of AI urbanism it is there-
fore key to acknowledge the lineage of AI,
and to identify what is new as well as what
has had a longer gestation. AI urbanism is
history and future at the same time and its
most evident ancestor is smart urbanism
which forms the starting point of this sec-
tion. Our intention here is to compare tradi-
tional practices and understandings of smart
urbanism with emerging forms of urban liv-
ing, urban governance and urban planning
influenced by AI. Our use of the term ‘ver-
sus’ is aimed to draw out a comparison,
rather than contrast. Smart and AI are dif-
ferent, but they are not oppositional.
Table 1 compares smart urbanism and AI
urbanism through nine categories: technol-
ogy, action, space, agency, culture, personal-
ity, governance, time and materiality. First,
we focus on the core technology that has been
driving smart urbanism for more than two
decades and now underpins AI urbanism.
Within this category, we identify the Internet
of Things (IoT) as a key technological
Cugurullo et al. 1171

--- Page 5 ---
component of smart-city initiatives. IoT is an
umbrella term encapsulating several smart
technologies: sensors integrated into every-
day objects and the built environment, pro-
ducing large amounts of data, so-calledbig
data, which is instantly shared over digital
networks by the object itself (Kitchin and
McArdle, 2016; Kummitha and Crutzen,
2019). AI urbanism takes IoT to the next
level with the newly formed Artificial
Intelligence of Things (AIoT). The concept
of AIoT builds on that of IoT to describe
emerging technologies capable of acting
as well as sensing. Sensors, big data and digi-
tal networks continue to be fundamental
components, since urban AIs, such as auton-
omous cars, robots and city brains, need sen-
sors (cameras, for instance) to perceive the
surrounding environment and they produce
big data that is digitally shared and then
mediated by digital platforms (Caprotti
et al., 2022). What is different is that AIoT
brings artificial intelligence and its key cap-
abilities into ordinary things and spaces
(Zhang and Tao, 2020). This means that the
capacity to extract concepts and act autono-
mously (which IoT does not possess) is being
infused into previously inanimate objects
present in our homes, offices and urban
infrastructures.
Table 1. Smart urbanism versus AI urbanism.
Source: Authors’ original.
1172 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 6 ---
The second category, action, refers to
what the technology in question actually
does. To unpack this aspect of our compari-
son, we draw upon the philosophy of
Byung-Chul Han who points out that IoT
does not generate narratives, in the sense
that it simply counts instead of telling a
story (Han, 2017). Here in lies a major dif-
ference between smart urbanism and AI
urbanism. The former, by means of IoT,
counts. It calculates and determines the
quantity of a given urban phenomenon, such
as how much energy a building is consuming
or how many people are using a subway. Its
outcome appears in the form of numbers:
mainly quantitative data provided for
human consideration and intervention. In
contrast, in AI urbanism we find multiple
urban artificial intelligences that are capable
of producing accounts. An account is a basic
narrative that explains why and how certain
things occur in the city. For example,
Palantir is a predictive technology that anal-
yses urban data to provide explanations
about who will commit a crime, how and
where (Brayne, 2020). Such narratives are
not full stories, as urban AIs’ accounts are
interpreted, expanded and then acted upon
by human stakeholders (police officers, in
relation to Palantir’s example). This is
because, unlike humans, AIs are not con-
scious entities and, as the recent example of
ChatGPT reveals, they can produce a
detailed account in the shape of text, for
instance, without grasping its meaning (see
Floridi, 2023). However, even if they are
unconscious and unable to reflect on the
meaning and implications of what they do,
urban AIs perform actions that are imbued
with moral values. From an ethical point of
view, recent studies stress that many AIs are
now in the problematic and deeply contested
position of determining what is right or
wrong, fair or unfair, good or bad, such as
in the case of predictive technologies that
identify suspected criminals or AVs that
have to distribute inevitable harm when acci-
dents occur (Awad et al., 2018; Floridi et al.,
2018). These emerging ethical dynamics were
not present in traditional smart-city initia-
tives where complex moral questions
remained exclusively in the hands of
humans.
The third category of comparison refers to
where smart and AI technologies operate,
which is fundamentally a question of space.
There is plenty of evidence of the implementa-
tion of smart technology in existing cities all
around the world (Burns et al., 2021;
Karvonen et al., 2019). Yet, there is an ambig-
uous aspect to this spatial diffusion. Smart
technologies, although present in ordinary cit-
i e s ,a r eo f t e ni n s t a l l e di nc o n f i n e ds p a c e so ri n
infrastructures that are detached from human
encounters. For example, the smart grid, a
hallmark of smart urbanism, lies and operates
below the surface of the city and within the
infrastructures of buildings, conveniently out
of sight of local residents. Similarly, automated
transport systems tend to function under-
ground in restricted spaces devoid of humans
and traditional vehicles (Cugurullo, 2020).
This is not the case in AI urbanism. Service
robots operate on the front line, engaging face
to face with human customers (Belanche et al.,
2021). Drones and digital assistants interact
with people within their domestic envir-
onments (Strengers and Kennedy, 2020).
Autonomous cars traverse real-life open spaces
where everyone is allowed and anything can
happen (Cugurullo et al., 2021). In the city, the
space of urban AI intersects with the space of
human life without barriers.
Fourth, we focus on how technology
operates in smart and AI urbanism with an
emphasis on matters of agency. Here there is
a crucial distinction between automation
and autonomy. Automation, as Bourdieu
(2018: 37) notes, is about ‘repetitive pro-
cesses’ which are ‘constant and automatic.’
We observe this in smart urbanism where the
machine always does what it has been
Cugurullo et al. 1173

--- Page 7 ---
programmed for, continuously repeating the
same actions. An automated train in a rapid
transit system always follows the same route
and cannot leave its circuit. A motion-
sensitive smart light that automatically
switches on when someone walks by, cannot
diverge from this programmed course of
action. It is bound to follow strict rules deter-
mined by human engineers and computer
scientists. Autonomous urban AIs are differ-
ent. When AI comes into play, ‘we willingly
cede some of our decision-making power to
machines’ (Floridi et al., 2018: 698). On these
terms, autonomy is the capacity to make
decisions independently and this is what we
observe in AI urbanism. For instance, an
autonomous car makes decisions of a geogra-
phical nature deciding which route to take,
and a service robot in a shop recommends
different products to different customers
after listening to their individual preferences.
In these cases, prescription gives way to per-
formance and this is where AI urbanism
begins to exhibit agency that was never pres-
e n ti ns m a r tc i t i e s .H o w e v e r ,i ti si m p o r t a n t
to stress that urban AIs’ quality of being
autonomous does not imply a complete
detachment from humans. In fact, from a
conceptual perspective, it is quite the oppo-
site. An urban AI can indeed make a certain
decision independently, but that decision
would be inevitably influenced (and thus
biased) by previous human-made decisions,
since these are machines trained on large
datasets reflecting past human experiences
(Crawford, 2021). In this sense, the machine’s
act of making a decision might be innovative,
while its decision could ‘echo existing ideolo-
gies and regimes’ and therefore be conserva-
tive (Cugurullo, 2020: 10).
Relatedly, our fifth point stresses the cul-
tural aspects of AI urbanism compared to
smart urbanism. The term ‘smart city’ began
to circulate in the late 1990s and back then
its meaning was obscure, as it was a niche
that only few urban policymakers and
citizens had heard about (Vanolo, 2014).
Ten years later, even in a cutting-edge urban
settlement like Masdar City in Abu Dhabi,
packed with smart technology in every single
building, people could barely make sense of
smart (Cugurullo, 2013). Today, AI strikes a
different chord. From a cultural point of
view, artificial intelligence is popular. People
might not know how artificially intelligent
entities are created, but they are aware that
AI is in our phones and is being evoked
when someone says Hello Alexa! or OK
Google and Hey Siri!Similarly, it is no mys-
tery that AI is behind the making of
blockbuster movies and that many kids
grow up playing against AIs or cooperating
with them in videogames. In essence, unlike
smart, AI has become part of the cultural
landscape of the 21st century. However, the
roots of its imaginary go back to at least the
previous century with popular books and
movies such as Asimov’sFoundation series
and Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey .
Nowadays, many AI-centred narratives, like
the bestselling novels by Cixin Liu and
Kazuo Ishiguro, are projecting fictional
images of autonomous and conscious artifi-
cial intelligences that are capturing the ima-
ginations of people around the world. It is
arguably because of this pop aspect of artifi-
cial intelligence that a number of urban AIs
are being accepted, thereby rapidly becom-
ing part of everyday life in cities.
Sixth, is an interrelated aspect: personal-
ity. Returning to Bourdieu (2018: 37), the
process of automation tends to ‘reduce the
role of personality . . . in order to have regu-
larity, repetition.’ Bourdieu’s reflections fit
the nature of automated smart technologies.
What personality does a sensor have? Or a
smart grid? None. By design, these technolo-
gies have no specific behavioural or mental
traits, since they are not built to have a mind.
The growing trend that we observe in AI
urbanism is different and it is best exempli-
fied by robots and urban software agents. It
1174 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 8 ---
is common practice in the robotics industry
to name robots and for urban stakeholders
to later nickname them, so to convey a sense
of personality (Lin and Yeo, 2023). In
Milton Keynes (UK), for instance, delivery
robots are patted like pet dogs (Valdez and
Cook, 2023). Common software agents that
populate our homes today, like Alexa, not
only have a name, but also a way of talking
and a tone of voice purposefully meant to
express character (Strengers and Kennedy,
2020). On the one hand, this trend shows the
intention of AI developers to create charac-
terful technologies. For example, robotics
engineer Boris Sofman was inspired by Pixar
characters when he invented Cozmo, a small
domestic robot, in 2016 to stimulate a sense
of empathy in human–machine relation-
ships. On the other hand, however, we need
to remember that these technologies do not
have a personality beyond what is projected
on them by human users who, as Marenko
and van Allen (2016: 54) remark, often tend
to attribute personality to complex high-tech
devices ‘because it is the easiest route to
explain their behavior’ (see also Turkle,
2020). Overall, while we are still a long way
from facing empathic AIs that behave and
feel like humans, we are already far from the
cold and impersonal machines of the era of
smart urbanism.
Seventh, the cultural diffusion of AI extends
to the political sphere. Both smart and AI are
part of the governance of cities, but in different
ways. In traditional smart-city initiatives, tech-
nology is a tool in the hands of policymakers
and planners. For instance, sensors are used to
produce data on the metabolism of the city in
terms of energy consumption, and human
decision-makers manage energy production in
light of the insights that smart technology has
generated. In a similar way, the urban dash-
board, a much-debated article of faith in smart
urbanism, brings together a variety of informa-
tion about a given city, to inform city
managers and policymakers (Mattern, 2021).
The dashboard’s influence is indirect. It
informs human decisions but does not make
decisions by itself. In AI urbanism instead we
observe a different status quo. Urban AIs like
city brains and urban software agents, in par-
ticular, are directly influencing the governance
of cities, by making decisions. City brains man-
age urban traffic and determine apparently
optimised mobility strategies independent of
humans (Caprotti and Liu, 2020). Predictive
policing programmes identify for themselves
individuals and potential criminals that they
classify as suspicious (Brayne, 2020). In this
sense, urban AI is not merely a passive tool to
inform human decision-makers, but rather an
active stakeholder which makes decisions and
shapes urban governance. This situation is not
accidental. Political decisions made by humans
place urban AIs in the position to make
decisions about the governance of cities. This
is particularly evident in technophilic political
contexts where governments embrace innova-
tion in AI and foster its integration
into multiple levels of governance (Roberts
et al., 2021).
The previous aspect of AI urbanism leads
us to the penultimate category of our com-
parison: time. In smart urbanism, the tem-
poral dimension of cities is clearly
conceptualised by Kitchin (2014) through
the notion of the ‘real-time city’. This is the
city of sensors producing large volumes of
data in real time, meaning the actual time in
which what is being sensed by smart technol-
ogy is occurring. For example, a smart
building calculates how much energy is
being consumed, while its occupants are
using various appliances. The focus of smart
technologies is on the present when diverse
urban activities take place. In AI urbanism
the focus of technology is mostly on the
future: activities and situations that have not
yet taken place, but that are likely to occur –
autonomous cars anticipating and avoiding
Cugurullo et al. 1175

--- Page 9 ---
busy junctions; service robots anticipating a
customer’s next request; city brains foresee-
ing how much energy a city will consume in
the coming years and how much carbon
dioxide will be emitted; algorithms predict-
ing the future value of a property or who is
about to commit a crime. These are all
examples of how urban AI extends the time-
frame of urbanism into the future. To some
extent, the will to anticipate the future has
been an important part of urban governance
since the 17th century with the invention
and application of statistics and probability
theory to determine the likelihood of uncer-
tain scenarios (Reith, 2004). What is differ-
ent today is that the intelligence behind the
prediction of possible urban futures is non-
human.
Finally, we emphasise the materiality of
AI urbanism and the material impact that
all urban AIs have on urban spaces. To
unpack the final category of our compari-
son, we draw upon Bauman’s (2013) theory
of light modernity. For Bauman (2013), light
modernity characterises cities and societies
after the age of the Industrial Revolution
which saw the emergence of heavy technolo-
gies and building materials such as cars and
reinforced concrete. Light modernity repre-
sents the era of soft technologies which are
lightweight and diminutive, and these are
the sensors, microchips and IoT devices that
smart urbanism has made popular in urban
development. Their small size and light
materiality translate into a soft and barely
visible material impact on the built environ-
ment (Cugurullo, 2021). Because of their
often more substantive materiality, urban
artificial intelligences are different from tra-
ditional smart technologies. Autonomous
cars and trucks are heavy technologies
whose transit require vast amounts of urban
space. Delivery robots have a clear and uni-
gnorable material presence in public spaces
that require urban policymakers to redefine
the rights of way on sidewalks. Seemingly
ethereal urban AIs like city brains do not
have a body, but they have multiple physical
actuators and appendices (CCTV cameras,
for example), and their material impact is
significant when their decisions affect urban
planning, leading to the construction of new
buildings and districts. AI urbanism trans-
cends light modernity, thus opening up a
new modernity whose urban impact is still
largely unknown and poorly understood. It
is with the double aim of identifying and dis-
cussing AI urbanism’s most critical issues
that we move to the next section.
Critical questions surrounding
AI urbanism
We see AI urbanism more than in purely
abstract terms. This is an emerging urbanism
that is transcending smart urbanism, thus pos-
ing new challenges that require new questions
and debates in urban studies. In the following
paragraphs, we employ the nine categories
examined in the previous section as stepping
stones to critically discuss AI urbanism’s main
issues, connecting each issue with a critical
question, in an attempt to generate debate
and stimulate future research.
Issue #1: To what extent is AI urbanism
sustainable?
Like smart urbanism, AI urbanism is an
urbanism driven by technological develop-
ment and innovation. As such, it is an expen-
sive urbanism that is difficult and costly to
sustain, financially and environmentally. AI
technology is expensive and energy-intensive,
and it consumes vast quantities of critical
raw materials (Crawford, 2021; Dauvergne,
2020). AI urbanism also reinforces a com-
promising reliance on tech companies which
come into play by producing, installing,
maintaining and updating AI technology. In
Western countries, this condition leaves cit-
ies and nations vulnerable to the same
1176 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 10 ---
neoliberal and socially unjust outcomes
often associated with smart urbanism
(Masucci et al., 2020). In a country like
China instead, we expect heavy-handed and
undemocratic government interventions that
will further extend the power and influence
of the state (Lee, 2018; Roberts et al., 2021).
However, as philosophers in particular
remind us, new pathways of resource con-
sumption, environmental preservation and
social organisation are possible in the age of
AI (Cowls et al., 2023; Floridi et al., 2018).
As urbanists we care to note that every
opportunity presented by AI urbanism in
terms of sustainability will have to confront
the legacy of social, environmental and spa-
tial inequality created by decades of smart
urbanism.
Issue #2: What visions of the city are
urban AIs going to diffuse?
Storytelling has been a core human skill since
the earliest forms of social organisation. It is
a capacity that has also had a significant
impact on urban development as, across time
and space, different urban stakeholders have
developed and promulgated different visions
of the good city, leading to the genesis of new
settlements while influencing the governance
of existing cities (Cugurullo, 2021). Now that
urban AIs are capable of producing narra-
tives and accounts that define what is good
or bad in and for the city, there is the risk
that AI-generated idealisations of the city
might not correspond to crucial human ideals
such as justice and equity. In fact, there is
already evidence of AI-generated narratives
that, particularly in the fields of housing and
real-estate, are penalising racial minorities
(Fields, 2022; Safransky, 2020). Moreover, it
would be dangerous to assume that artificial
and human intelligences reason in the same
way (Bostrom, 2017). Particularly around
thorny ethical urban questions, such as trolley
problems in urban transport, planning and
predictive policing (see Cugurullo, 2022), the
AI’s side of the story must be carefully exam-
ined and debated in a collective manner.
Issue #3: What new human–machine
relations are emerging in AI urbanism?
Urban AI is entering everyday urban spaces
of life and work. It will not be confined to
labs or remote infrastructures, and the tra-
jectory of urban living is soon going to inter-
sect with the life of robots, autonomous
cars, city brains and software agents.
Physical and digital ecosystems are colliding,
producing complex new geographies charac-
terised by tensions, outright clashes but also
instances of cooperation. It is unlikely that
AI urbanism will be evenly distributed. We
expect a spatial distribution akin to that of
smart urbanism, marked by fragmented
spaces, hackable and glitchy technologies
that are not compatible with one another
and open the city to security vulnerabilities,
and interventions that splinter urban societ-
ies (Cugurullo, 2021; Graham and Marvin,
2002; Leszczynski and Elwood, 2022;
Maalsen, 2022). In some cases, urban AIs
will compete against humans, but also
against one another, to control urban spaces
and services. In others, as computer science
literature suggests, humans will learn to
cooperate with AI (and vice versa), thereby
forging novel human–machine relations
(Crandall et al., 2018).
Issue #4: What levels of autonomy are
human and artificial urban stakeholders
going to have?
The autonomy of urban AIs means that, in AI
urbanism, we will cede part of our decision-
making power to machines (Cugurullo, 2021;
Floridi et al., 2018). Most importantly, from
an urbanistic perspective, autonomy means
that the repetition and monotony of traditional
smart technologies will be replaced by their
Cugurullo et al. 1177

--- Page 11 ---
opposites: improvisation and sporadic actions
that might differ substantially from existing
patterns, norms and relations. The problem is
that autonomy is a zero-sum game: some-
body’s (or something’s) autonomy grows at
the expense of someone else’s autonomy. It is
crucial that human stakeholders retain high
levels of autonomy to act and make decisions,
in situations and contexts where the actions of
u r b a nA It e n dt od e v i a t ef r o mt h en o r m .I n
addition, it seems critical that human auton-
omy should be retained especially where AI
logics can generate uneven outcomes that nega-
tively affect particular social groups or places.
Issue #5: What characters will urban AI
develop and how can we avoid racist and
sexist characterisations in AI urbanism?
Having a character isan important trait for
urban AI: one that can facilitate human–
machine interactions and promote coopera-
tion rather than antagonism. However, the
characterisation of urban AI (e.g. robots and
urban software agents, in particular) is often
stereotypical, racist and sexist (Lin and
Yeo, 2023; Strengers and Kennedy, 2020). In
essence, the character of urban AI urgently
needs a feminist reboot to avoid the reproduc-
tion of existing gender stereotypes (Strengers
and Kennedy, 2020; Toupin, 2023).
Furthermore, we see in postcolonial theory an
essential perspective to promote the formation
of AI personalities that go beyond Western
images, to fully capture the ethnic, cultural,
political and ideological diversity of contem-
porary cities around the world. This is about
decentering the characterisation of urban AI
and ‘rejecting an imitation of the West’ when
the designers of robots and urban software
agents craft the aesthetics and tone of these
technologies to evoke a sense of personality
(Mohamed et al., 2020: 664).
Issue #6: How can urban AI
be made explainable?
There is a fundamental tension in the societal
acceptance of urban AI. On the one hand, as
noted in the previous section, AI is part of
popular culture. On the other hand, litera-
ture in the field of Explainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI) indicates that AI technol-
ogy, its mechanics and, especially, its impacts
remain obscure even to the very AI scientists
who are building the technology (Miller
et al., 2022). Without an expanded public
debate, education and disclosure, it is then
likely that the diffusion of AI urbanism will
be accelerated by the blind acceptance of a
technology that we believe we understand,
while in reality most of us are clueless.
Issue #7: How can urban AIs’ goals
be understood and aligned?
Approaching urban AI as a participant with
an active role in the governance of cities,
rather than an inanimate tool built to
improve urban governance, has a twofold
implication. First, there is the empirical and
theoretical question of which specific urban
AIs can be considered as stakeholders in
urban governance, and how their stakes and
logics can be identified and understood.
Second, there is a potential issue of align-
ment which should make us question and
then examine the extent to which urban AI’s
actions and goals are compatible with
human interests and values. The alignment
problem refers to the challenge of aligning
the values and goals of artificial intelligences
with those of human beings (Han et al.,
2021). For centuries, urban governance has
been the arena where human values and
goals have been debated and discussed, and
it is now time to bring the alignment prob-
lem into these debates and discussions.
1178 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 12 ---
Issue #8: What urban futures is AI
urbanism producing and preempting?
The future is not simply the temporal focus
of AI urbanism but also its target. Any pol-
icy based on predictive algorithms ‘inevitably
alters a future that is yet to come’ (Luque-
Ayala and Marvin, 2020: 134). Urban AIs,
such as city brains and urban software
agents, can produce certain futures while
preventing others from happening. There is
no guarantee that urban AIs’ predictions are
accurate, let alone the risk that anticipatory
policies might feed on so-called ‘dirty data’
that is ‘derived from or influenced by corrupt
and unlawful practices’ and can generate
runaway feedback loops (Richardson et al.,
2019: 18; see also Brayne, 2020). What is at
stake here is the future of the city. The future
cities that urban AIs are calculating and
shaping are perhaps not the types of cities
that humans want to inhabit.
Issue #9: How can urban planning
respond to the rapid urban changes
triggered by AI?
AI urbanism has a substantial materiality
that cannot be ignored. It is a materiality
that, in the worst-case scenario, can kill - as
it has already happened in the field of auton-
omous transport when Elaine Herzberg was
struck by a self-driving car in the city of
Tempe, Arizona (Stilgoe, 2020). The issue
here is that the production of urban AI and
the discharge of its materiality in cities, pro-
ceeds at a pace that is not remotely compa-
rable to that of urban planning. In 2020, for
instance, the total global investment in AI
increased by 40% (Zhang et al., 2021). This
is a major boost in the implementation of all
the different urban artificial intelligences
discussed in this article. While capital is
being pumped rapidly into the AI industry,
the planning process remains slow and
inefficient in many cities. There is an evident
and chronic problem with urban planning’s
inability to catch up with processes of tech-
nological change that surpass urban change
in speed and growth.
Conclusion: Post smart and
towards autonomous cities?
Autonomous cars, robots, city brains and
urban software agents are technologies that
already exist and populate urban spaces, and
their impact on urban planning, urban govern-
ance and urban living is transcending smart
urbanism. This transition beyond orpost smart
is both theoretical and empirical in nature.
Theoretically, we have shown in the second sec-
tion that AI urbanism is not synonymous with
smart urbanism. Empirically, we have stressed,
in the third section, that an urbanism driven by
urban artificial intelligences is already produc-
ing and will continue to give rise to new practi-
cal and conceptual challenges.
By transcending the smart city, the rise of
AI urbanism might lead in the future to the
formation of the autonomous city defined as
a space where diverse urban AIs perform
social and managerial functions that have
traditionally been human activities, in an
unsupervised manner. While we can already
observe the seeds of the autonomous city in
experimental urban projects like Neom in
Saudi Arabia and Beiyang AI Town in
China, the future emergence of this model of
urban development remains an open ques-
tion. This is an urgent question for urban
scholars to consider because, ‘a city run not
byhuman but by artificial intelligences’
would challenge the autonomy of human
stakeholders and struggle to be environmen-
tally sustainable due to energy-intensive sup-
ply chains (Cugurullo, 2021: 14). We began
this article by explaining why AI needs the
city, and we want to conclude it by ponder-
ing the question: does the city need AI?
Cugurullo et al. 1179

--- Page 13 ---
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank all the participants at theAI
Urbanism online workshops, for their precious
inputs and company during the 2021–2022 lock-
downs, the editor Phil Hubbard for his constant
support, and the three anonymous referees for
their invaluable comments. This research received
no specific grant from any funding agency in the
public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.
ORCID iD
Federico Cugurullo https://orcid.org/0000-
0002-0625-8868
Federico Caprottihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-
5280-1016
Matthew Cookhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-
2373-2127
Andrew Karvonenhttps://orcid.org/0000-
0002-0688-9547
Pauline McGuirk https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
6688-9661
Simon Marvinhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-
5538-5102
References
Acheampong RA, Cugurullo F, Gueriau M, et al.
(2021) Can autonomous vehicles enable sus-
tainable mobility in future cities? Insights and
policy challenges from user preferences over
different urban transport options.Cities 112:
103134.
Awad E, Dsouza S, Kim R, et al. (2018) The
moral machine experiment.Nature 563(7729):
59–64.
Barns S (2021) Out of the loop? On the radical
and the routine in urban big data.Urban Stud-
ies 58(15): 3203–3210.
Bauman Z (2013) Liquid Modernity. London:
John Wiley & Sons.
Belanche D, Casalo´LV, Schepers J, et al. (2021)
Examining the effects of robots’ physical
appearance, warmth, and competence in
frontline services: The Humanness-Value-
Loyalty model.Psychology & Marketing
38(12): 2357–2376.
Bostrom N (2017) Superintelligence. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bourdieu P (2018)On the State: Lectures at the
Colle`ge de France, 1989-1992. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Brayne S (2020)Predict and Surveil: Data, Discre-
tion, and the Future of Policing . Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Burns R, Fast V, Levenda A, et al. (2021) Smart
cities: Between worlding and provincialising.
Urban Studies58(3): 461–470.
Caprotti F, Chang I-CC and Joss S (2022)
Beyond the smart city: A typology of plat-
form urbanism. Urban Transformations 4(1):
1–21.
Caprotti F and Liu D (2020) Platform urbanism
and the Chinese smart city: The co-production
and territorialisation of Hangzhou City Brain.
GeoJournal 87(3): 1–15.
Cowls J, Tsamados A, Taddeo M, et al. (2023)
The AI gambit: Leveraging artificial intelli-
gence to combat climate change—opportuni-
ties, challenges, and recommendations.AI &
Society 38: 283–307.
Crandall JW, Oudah M, Ishowo-Oloko F, et al.
(2018) Cooperating with machines. Nature
Communications 9: 233.
Crawford K (2021)Atlas of AI. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Cugurullo F (2013) How to build a sandcastle:
An analysis of the genesis and development of
Masdar City. Journal of Urban Technology
20(1): 23–37.
Cugurullo F (2020) Urban artificial intelligence:
From automation to autonomy in the smart
city. Frontiers in Sustainable Cities2: 38.
Cugurullo F (2021)Frankenstein Urbanism: Eco,
Smart and Autonomous Cities, Artificial Intelli-
gence and the End of the City. London:
Routledge.
Cugurullo F (2022) Good and evil in the autono-
mous city. In: Mackinnon D, Burns R and
1180 Urban Studies 61(6)

--- Page 14 ---
Fast V (eds) Digital (In)justice in the Smart
City. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Cugurullo F, Acheampong RA, Gueriau M, et al.
(2021) The transition to autonomous cars, the
redesign of cities and the future of urban sus-
tainability. Urban Geography42(6): 833–859.
Curran D and Smart A (2021) Data-driven gov-
ernance, smart urbanism and risk-class
inequalities: Security and social credit in
China.Urban Studies58(3): 487–506.
Dauvergne P (2020)AI in the Wild: Sustainability
in the Age of Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Dowling R and McGuirk P (2022) Autonomous
vehicle experiments and the city.Urban Geo-
graphy 43(3): 409–426.
Fields D (2022) Automated landlord: Digital
technologies and post-crisis financial accumu-
lation. Environment and Planning A: Economy
and Space54(1): 160–181.
Floridi L (2023) AI as agency without intelli-
gence: On ChatGPT, large language models,
and other generative models.Philosophy &
Technology 36(1): 15.
Floridi L, Cowls J, Beltrametti M, et al. (2018)
AI4People—An ethical framework for a good
AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles,
and recommendations.Minds and Machines
28(4): 689–707.
Graham S and Marvin S (2002)Splintering Urban-
ism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological
Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London:
Routledge.
Han BC (2017) Saving Beauty. London: John
Wiley & Sons.
Han S, Kelly E, Nikou S and Svee EO (2021)
Aligning artificial intelligence with human val-
ues: Reflections from a phenomenological per-
spective.AI & Society37: 1383–1395.
Hopkins D (2023) Autonomous lorries, artificial
intelligence and urban (freight) mobilities. In:
Cugurullo F, Caprotti F, Cook M, et al. (eds)
(2023) Artificial Intelligence and the City:
Urbanistic Perspectives on AI . Abingdon:
Routledge.
Jackman A and Brickell K (2021) ‘Everyday
droning’: Towards a feminist geopolitics of
the drone-home. Progress in Human Geogra-
phy 46(1): 156–178.
Karvonen A, Cugurullo F and Caprotti F (eds)
(2019) Inside Smart Cities: Place, Politics and
Urban Innovation. London: Routledge.
Kitchin R (2014) The real-time city? Big data and
smart urbanism.GeoJournal 79(1): 1–14.
Kitchin R (2020) Civil liberties or public health,
or civil liberties and public health? Using sur-
veillance technologies to tackle the spread of
COVID-19.Space and Polity24(3): 362–381.
Kitchin R and McArdle G (2016) What makes
Big Data, Big Data? Exploring the ontological
characteristics of 26 datasets.Big Data & Soci-
ety 3(1): 1–10.
Kummitha RKR and Crutzen N (2019) Smart cit-
ies and the citizen-driven internet of things: A
qualitative inquiry into an emerging smart city.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
140: 44–53.
Lee KF (2018) AI Superpowers: China, Silicon
Valley, and the New World Order . Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Leszczynski A and Elwood S (2022) Glitch epis-
temologies for computational cities.Dialogues
in Human Geography12(3): 361–378.
Lin W (2022) Atmospheric conditioning: airport
automation, labour and the COVID-19 pan-
demic.Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers 47(1): 214–228.
Lin W and Yeo SJI (2023) Airport robots: automa-
tion, everyday life and the future of urbanism.
In: Cugurullo F, Caprotti F, Cook M, et al.
(eds)Artificial Intelligence and the City: Urba-
nistic Perspectives on AI. Abingdon: Routledge.
Luque-Ayala A and Marvin S (2020)Urban Oper-
ating Systems: Producing the Computational
City. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luusua A, Ylipulli J, Foth M, et al. (2023) Urban
AI: Understanding the emerging role of artifi-
cial intelligence in smart cities.AI & Society
38: 1039–1044.
Lynch CR (2021) Critical geographies of social
robotics. Digital Geography and Society 2:
100010.
Maalsen S (2022) The hack: What it is and why it
matters to urban studies.Urban Studies59(2):
453–465.
Macrorie R, Marvin S and While A (2021)
Robotics and automation in the city: A research
agenda.Urban Geography42(2): 197–217.
Cugurullo et al. 1181

--- Page 15 ---
Marenko B and van Allen P (2016) Animistic
design: how to reimagine digital interaction
between the human and the nonhuman.Digi-
tal Creativity, 27(1), 52–70.
Masucci M, Pearsall H and Wiig A (2020) The
smart city conundrum for social justice: Youth
perspectives on digital technologies and urban
transformations.Annals of the American Asso-
ciation of Geographers110(2): 476–484.
Mattern S (2021)A City is Not a Computer: Other
Urban Intelligences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Miller T, Hoffman R, Amir O, et al. (2022) Spe-
cial Issue on explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI).Artificial Intelligence307: 103705.
Mintrom M, Sumartojo S, Kulic´D, et al. (2021)
Robots in public spaces: Implications for pol-
icy design.Policy Design and Practice 5(2):
123–139.
Mohamed S, Png MT and Isaac W (2020) Deco-
lonial AI: Decolonial theory as sociotechnical
foresight in artificial intelligence.Philosophy &
Technology 33: 659–684.
O’Neil C (2016) Weapons of Math Destruction:
How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threa-
tens Democracy. London: Penguin.
Pearl J (2014) Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelli-
gent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Reith G (2004) Uncertain times: The notion of
‘risk’ and the development of modernity.Time
& Society13(2–3): 383–402.
Richardson R, Schultz JM and Crawford K
(2019) Dirty data, bad predictions: How civil
rights violations impact police data, predictive
policing systems, and justice.New York Uni-
versity Law Review94: 192.
Roberts H, Cowls J, Morley J, et al. (2021) The
Chinese approach to artificial intelligence: An
analysis of policy, ethics, and regulation.AI &
SOCIETY 36(1): 59–77.
Russell SJ and Norvig P (2016)Artificial Intelli-
gence: A Modern Approach. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.
Safransky S (2020) Geographies of algorithmic
violence: Redlining the smart city.International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research44(2):
200–218.
Son TH, Weedon Z, Yigitcanlar T, et al. (2023)
Algorithmic urban planning for smart and sus-
tainable development: Systematic review of the
literature. Sustainable Cities and Society 94:
104562.
Stilgoe J (2020) Who’s Driving Innovation. New
Technologies and the Collaborative State.L o n -
don: Palgrave Macmillan.
Strengers Y and Kennedy J (2020) The Smart
Wife: Why Siri, Alexa, and Other Smart Home
Devices Need a Feminist Reboot. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Tennant C and Stilgoe J (2021) The attachments
of ‘autonomous’ vehicles.Social Studies of Sci-
ence 51(6): 846–870.
Toupin S (2023) Shaping feminist artificial intelli-
gence. New Media & Society. Epub ahead of
print 17 February 2023. DOI: 10.1177/1461
4448221150776.
Turkle S (2020) A nascent robotics culture: New
complicities for companionship. In: Wallach
W F and Asaro P (eds)Machine Ethics and
Robot Ethics. Abingdon: Routledge, pp.107–
116.
Valdez M and Cook M (2023) Humans, robots
and artificial intelligences reconfiguring urban
life in a crisis.Frontiers in Sustainable Cities5:
1081821.
Vanolo A (2014) Smartmentality: The smart city
as disciplinary strategy. Urban Studies 51(5):
883–898.
While AH, Marvin S and Kovacic M (2021) Urban
robotic experimentation: San Francisco, Tokyo
and Dubai.Urban Studies58(4): 769–786.
Zhang D, Mishra S, Brynjolfsson E, et al. (2021)
The AI index 2021 Annual Report. AI Index
Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI
Institute, Stanford University.
Zhang J and Tao D (2020) Empowering things
with intelligence: A survey of the progress,
challenges, and opportunities in artificial intel-
ligence of things.IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 8(10): 7789–7817.
1182 Urban Studies 61(6)